Learning Multi-View Interactional Skeleton
Graph for Action Recognition
Minsi Wang
, Bingbing Ni
, and Xiaokang Yang
, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—Capturing the interactions of human articulations lies in the center of skeleton-based action recognition. Recent
graph-based methods are inherently limited in the weak spatial context modeling capability due to ﬁxed interaction pattern and
inﬂexible shared weights of GCN. To address above problems, we propose the multi-view interactional graph network (MV-IGNet)
which can construct, learn and infer multi-level spatial skeleton context, including view-level (global), group-level, joint-level (local)
context, in a uniﬁed way. MV-IGNet leverages different skeleton topologies as multi-views to cooperatively generate complementary
action features. For each view, separable parametric graph convolution (SPG-Conv) enables multiple parameterized graphs to enrich
local interaction patterns, which provides strong graph-adaption ability to handle irregular skeleton topologies. We also partition the
skeleton into several groups and then the higher-level group contexts including inter-group and intra-group, are hierarchically captured
by above SPG-Conv layers. A simple yet effective global context adaption (GCA) module facilitates representative feature extraction by
learning the input-dependent skeleton topologies. Compared to the mainstream works, MV-IGNet can be readily implemented while
with smaller model size and faster inference. Experimental results show the proposed MV-IGNet achieves impressive performance on
large-scale benchmarks: NTU-RGB+D and NTU-RGB+D 120.
Index Terms—Action recognition, skeleton, multi-view, graph neural network, hierarchical method
Ç
1
INTRODUCTION
A
CTION understanding lies in the center of human-related
video analysis, e.g., visual surveillance, autonomous
driving, and robotic interactions, etc. Various modalities have
been exploited to address action analysis problem, including
visual appearance (RGB), depth information (RGB-D), optical
ﬂow, even sound. RGB image-based action understanding
(e.g., action recognition, prediction, and detection) has made a
breakthrough by taking advantages of deep convolution neu-
ral network (CNN). Abundant works [1], [2], [3], [4] have
proved that ﬁne-grained motion dynamic is a critical clue to
discriminate different actions. However, directly extracting
action representations from video sequences neglects essen-
tial ﬁne-grained features, especially the intrinsic interactions
between human articulations.
Compared to the RGB image, 2D/3D human skeleton can
be generated by pose estimation methods (e.g., Openpose [5],
Densepose [6]), or captured by Microsoft Kinetics [7], show-
ing its irreplaceable advantages in action representation.
Namely, it provides detailed position and movement infor-
mation of human articulations (joints in skeleton), which are
essential
for
constructing
spatiotemporal
and
motion
features. Although many works [8], [9], [10] have utilized
skeleton data to help human action understanding, e.g., skel-
eton-based action recognition, how to efﬁciently capture spa-
tial interaction context (the interactions among human
articulations), is still a key challenge.
For skeleton-based action recognition, recent works mainly
learn action representations with deep neural networks
(DNN). There are generally three ways: the ﬁrst type [11], [12]
utilizes recurrent neural networks (RNN), e.g., Long-Short
Term Memory (LSTM), to model sequential feature vectors
which are formed by concatenating joint coordinates at each
frame. This type learns temporal dynamics of feature vectors
without considering spatial context, i.e., it generates spatial
features directly through fully-connection (FC) and ignores
the relationships of skeleton joints. The second [13], [14]
regards the spatial and temporal dimensions of skeleton
sequence as image’s width and height respectively to form
spatiotemporal skeleton maps and performs vanilla 2D con-
volution on above maps to capture spatiotemporal co-occur-
rence features. The essential spatial relationships are still
ignored for this type. The third way constructs skeleton graph
according to physical connections of human articulations [8],
[9], [15], [15], [16], [17], and extracts spatial features by graph-
based methods, e.g., graph convolution network (GCN).
Although GCN-based methods improve the capabilities
of capturing the articulations’ relationships to some degree,
ﬁxed interaction pattern and inﬂexible shared weights of
GCN still limit its expressiveness. Notice that discriminat-
ing complex actions needs to capture the abundant and
dynamic relationships of nodes/joints in the skeleton
sequence. However, in previous graph-based works, ﬁxed
graph means constant interaction pattern among joints
(static rather than dynamic), and weight sharing leads to a
single interaction pattern (poor instead of abundant), which

Minsi Wang and Xiaokang Yang are with the MoE Key Lab of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai
200240, China. E-mail: mswang1994@gmail.com, xkyang@sjtu.edu.cn.

Bingbing Ni is with the Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240,
China. E-mail: nibingbing@sjtu.edu.cn.
Manuscript received 29 September 2019; revised 30 September 2020; accepted
10 October 2020. Date of publication 21 October 2020; date of current version
5 May 2023.
(Corresponding author: Bingbing Ni.)
Recommended for acceptance by S. Bai, P.H.S. Torr, R. Krishna, F.-F. Li,
A. Gupta, and S.-C. Zhu.
Digital Object Identiﬁer no. 10.1109/TPAMI.2020.3032738
6940
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 45, NO. 6, JUNE 2023
0162-8828 © 2020 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See ht_tps://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Zhejiang University. Downloaded on May 15,2026 at 07:50:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.


cannot well addressed the intrinsic multi-level spatial skele-
ton context shown as follows.
Speciﬁcally, there are multi-level spatial skeleton relation-
ships in Fig. 1, in which each level context contains unique
information. Joint-level (local) context describes the relation-
ships between one joint and its neighbors. The group-level
context shows joints’ latent relations and the higher-level
interactions between groups. Graph/View-level (global)
context deﬁnes all the possible interaction path of joints, i.e.,
the skeleton topology, which is very vital for describing and
understanding actions.
Joint-Level Context. Existing GCN-based methods conduct
weight-sharing mechanism for graph-structured feature
extraction, which is indeed practical in handling dynamics
graphs with arbitrary adjacent relations. But for skeleton
data, single and shared weight means that for each joint, its
neighbors always provide constant contributions, i.e., single
interaction pattern. As shown in Fig. 1d, to thoroughly rep-
resent complex actions, the relationships between a joint
and its neighbors (local context) should be more diverse.
Thus, employing multiple learnable graphs can enrich the
local interaction patterns and offer stronger feature extrac-
tion ability.
Group-Level Context. Current graph-based methods direc-
tly integrate features of all joints to generate ﬁnal spatial
features, which ignores the multi-level interactions. In both
CNN and GCN, hierarchically capturing local context can
facilitate high-level feature extraction, e.g., pooling. Thus,
the hierarchical skeleton context modeling can also generate
more comprehensive features for action recognition (See
Fig. 1c). For instance, we can cluster joints in “right arm” as
a group, and then the complex action “running” can be
represented as the relationship between groups, i.e., the
interactions between “arms” and “legs”.
Global-Level Context. The skeleton topology is ﬁxed and
manually deﬁned according to human intuition in previous
works, e.g., physical connections of articulations. This hand-
craft approach indeed brings appreciable improvements but
ignores other signiﬁcant interactions, e.g., the relationships
between the “left hand” and “right hand”. Though intuitively
adding auxiliary connections can consider above ignored
signiﬁcant interactions, e.g., connecting “legs” and “arms”,
these manual solutions are still inﬂexible and inefﬁcient
when dealing with different actions. Note that different
joints usually possess unequal importance for recognizing
speciﬁc actions (See Fig. 1e), e.g., the action “touching” is
mostly related to the joints in “hands” instead of “legs”. This
characteristic motivates us to design a framework which can
adaptively learn the skeleton topology rather than deﬁning
their interaction patterns.
Multi-View Representation. The skeleton graph can be
regarded as a way for both human and neural network to
describe and understand actions. We have known that dif-
ferent camera views can provide complementary informa-
tion about the skeleton, which is usually represented as
afﬁne transformations on original coordinates. Intuitively,
different skeleton topologies can also be regarded as trans-
formations on the relationships of joints, which is also a crit-
ical perspective to offer complementary information (See
Fig. 1b). Similar to the “isomers” in chemistry, two skeleton
graphs that have the same joints but different topologies
may reﬂect distinct properties of the human skeleton, i.e.,
ignoring and emphasizing different interactions. Therefore,
we can discover two different skeleton topologies to cooper-
atively represent the same action for more robust recogni-
tion. However, except physical connections, existing graph-
based methods are very sensitive to other graphs and can-
not easily handle irregular topologies except tailor-made
one. To this end, we expect to develop a simple, ﬂexible and
efﬁcient framework that can hugely lower the requirements
of network for the skeleton graph.
Inspired by above observations, we propose Multi-View
Interactional Graph Networks (MV-IGNet) focusing on join-
ts’ relationships, to construct, learn, and infer the multi-level
spatial skeleton context in a hierarchical way for action rec-
ognition. MV-IGNet leverages a skeleton graph and its com-
plement graph to cooperatively generate complementary
action features. For each graph, Separable Parametric Graph
Convolution (SPG-Conv) is devised to efﬁciently capture
richer local context, which possesses strong adaption ability
to handle irregular skeleton topologies. This superiority of
SPG-Conv lies in enabling multiple learnable graphs as
parameters to learn optimal interaction patterns. We also
construct and extract higher-level group context based on
hierarchical SPG-Conv layers. Global Context Adaption
(GCA) module is also proposed to adaptively learn input-
dependent skeleton topologies in the inference process.
Different from the self-attention mechanism, GCA directly
Fig. 1. The multi-level skeleton context represented by hierarchical graphs. (a) Original spatial skeleton data without any graph conﬁgurations. (b)
Global graph/view-level context deﬁnes the “view” that we describe the skeleton. Fixed graph restricts the information ﬂow path of joints. Our MV-
IGNet aims to generate different graphs (multi-view) without common edges to extract complementary features. (c) The group-level context in each
view, including intra-group and inter-group context, which possesses high-level semantic information. (d) Local context (interactions between a joint
and its neighbors) is the cornerstone of skeleton feature extraction. We enable multiple learnable graphs to enrich local interaction patterns. (e)
Action-related context. We expect that different interactions contribute unequally to different actions.
WANG ET AL.: LEARNING MULTI-VIEW INTERACTIONAL SKELETON GRAPH FOR ACTION RECOGNITION
6941
Authorized licensed use limited to: Zhejiang University. Downloaded on May 15,2026 at 07:50:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.


operates on the weights of SPG-Conv rather than input fea-
tures. In this way, the spatial interactional context including
view-level, group-level, joint-level, as well as the input-
related context is explicitly captured by MV-IGNet in a uni-
ﬁed way as shown in Fig. 1.
Our main contributions are summarized below:

A novel multi-view solution for action recognition,
which cooperatively utilizes different skeleton topolo-
gies instead of camera views to obtain complementary
action features. It’s general for graph-based methods.

A radical uniﬁed hierarchical modeling framework
to capture the multi-level spatial skeleton features.

A simple yet efﬁcient SPG-Conv, different from
GCN, that leverages multiple parametric graphs to
learn relationships and weights simultaneously. It
owns strong feature-extraction and graph-adaption
capability while hugely reducing computational cost.

An GCA module to “select” proper input-related
interactions by directly operating on SPG-Conv
weights instead of input features.

Experimental results show the proposed MV-IGNet
achieves impressive performance on large scale data-
sets: NTU-RGB+D and new NTU-RGB+D 120.
2
RELATED WORK
Graph-Based Neural Network. Graph neural network owns
strong abilities of modeling and irregular domain. Graph
based models usually include recurrent neural networks
(RNN) [18], [19] and convolutional neural networks (CNN)
[20]. For RNN based graph models, previous works [21], [22]
formed a graph then apply RNNs to capture note dependen-
cies. For graph convolution network (GCN), one typical
implementation lies in the spectral perspective, considering
graph convolution locality to perform spectral analysis [20],
[23], [24]. Another typical fashion focuses on the spatial
domain, where the convolution is directly applied to the
graph nodes and their neighbors [25], [26]. Our work devises
a novel graph-based framework, MV-IGNet, to capture multi-
level spatial skeleton features.
Multi-View Learning. Multi-view learning is an emerging
direction in machine learning which considers learning
with multiple views to improve the generalization perfor-
mance. Related works in machine learning can be found in
recent surveys [27], [28]. Multi-views have also been widely
used in many computer vision tasks. Human and objects
can be described from different points of view (camera
views) [29]. Color/shape and texture of objects are also two
different kinds of features, which can be regarded as two-
view data [30]. In many cases, however, no natural multiple
views are available due to certain limitations, so that only
one view may be provided to represent the data. Some
works have attempted to create more views from single
view by speciﬁc data augmentation, e.g., style transfer [31]
or by complementary constrains [32], [33]. In this paper, dif-
ferent from prevalent camera views in action recognition,
we leverage different skeleton topologies to create multi-
views. Different graphs provide distinct ways to describe
and understand the skeleton for both human and machines,
which indeed can offer complementary information.
Self-Attention Mechanism. Self-attention [34] has made a
great progress in machine translation. Recently, many appli-
cations of self-attention have been introduced into various
computer vision tasks. Their similarities lie in computing
the response at a position (e.g., in the sentence, image, or
video sequence) by attending to all positions and taking
their weighted average in an embedding space. Non-local
Network [35] presented non-local operations as a generic
family of building blocks for capturing long-range depen-
dencies. Wang et al. [36] proposed to represent videos as
space-time region graphs which represents the relationships
between humans and objects. Wu et al. [37] built a ﬂexible
and efﬁcient Actor Relation Graph (ARG) to simultaneously
capture the appearance and position relation between actors
for group activity recognition. The nonlocal network was
also employed in 2s-AGCN [38] for skeleton-based action
recognition. However, despite its advantages, the original
nonlocal block is infeasible in our method as discussed in
Section 3.4. Thus, we design a variant of self-attention:
global context adaption module, which directly operates on
weights instead of inputs to avoid incompatibility.
Skeleton-Based Action Recognition. There have been a large
number of works proposed for action recognition through
modeling skeleton dynamics. Early works mainly relies on
hand-craft features, e.g., covariance matrices of joint trajec-
tories [39], relative positions of joints [40] or rotations and
translations between body parts [41]. Recently, deep learn-
ing based models [10], [42], [43], [44] have been prevalent
for skeleton modeling, e.g., RNN, CNN and GCN. RNN
owns excellent temporal modeling ability, thus have been
used in capturing temporal dependency of joints [12], [45],
[46]. CNN-based methods [13], [14] transformed the skele-
tons into a series of color images and fed them into the
CNN to classify action category. Temporal CNNs [47], [48],
[49] were also proposed to learn skeleton motion. Taking
advantages of GCN, recent methods [8], [15], [17], [50]
obtained signiﬁcant improvements, e.g., HCN [10] focused
on co-occurrence feature learning framework featuring
global information of joints. Despite the progress that previ-
ous works achieved, the spatial context of joints is not well
exploited.
For local context, some works considered spatial context
mostly through hand-craft modules, e.g., body partitions.
ST-GCN [8] proposed a general GCN for skeleton modeling,
but it also introduced new partition strategies of GCN ker-
nel to handle spatial dependency. Although SR-TSL [9] per-
formed spatial reasoning by decomposing body into several
parts to address group-level context, it directly aggregates
features by fully-connection (FC) while ignoring inter-group
and intra-group relationships. The effects of the skeleton
topology (global context) are still neglected.
Recent works have exploited the global-level context by
introducing the attention mechanism. AS-GCN [51] com-
bined action and structural links to capture richer depen-
dencies.
AGC-LSTM
[52]
proposed
attention-enhanced
graph convolutional LSTM to capture high-level semantic
features. DGNN [53] represented the skeleton data as a
directed acyclic graph (DAG) and designed a novel feature
extraction algorithm for DAG. However, although 2s-
AGCN [38] has attempted to parameterized the skeleton
graph, its backbone is similar to the vanilla GCN-based
6942
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 45, NO. 6, JUNE 2023
Authorized licensed use limited to: Zhejiang University. Downloaded on May 15,2026 at 07:50:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.


network of ST-GCN [8], leading to that 2s-AGCN cannot
avoid the limitations of GCN. Most importantly, all above
methods lack graph-adaption ability thus cannot handle dif-
ferent skeleton topologies except well-designed one. On the
other hand, due to weight-sharing and ﬁxed graph, GCN-
based methods cannot capture diverse local context. To
address the above problems, we ﬁrst leverage complement
graphs as multi-views and propose uniﬁed MV-IGNet to
hierarchically capture multi-level spatial skeleton context.
3
MULTI-VIEW INTERACTIONAL GRAPH NETWORK
As motivated in Section 1, we reform the prevalent feature
extraction paradigm for skeleton graph and develop a uni-
ﬁed interactional graph learning framework for skeleton-
based action recognition. Our method named MV-IGNet,
captures multi-level spatial skeleton context by learning
graphs and weights simultaneously. MV-IGNet is the
ensemble of two complementary IGNet models. Each IGNet
consists of three functional parts: the ﬁrst is its basic unit, Sep-
arable Parametric Graph Convolution (SPG-Conv) which ena-
bles multiple learnable graphs as parameters to capture
richer interactions between joints and their neighbors. Com-
pared to vanilla GCN, SPG-Conv is more efﬁcient and effec-
tive, which also has stronger adaption capability to handle
irregular graphs. Based on SPG-Conv, SPG-pooling divides
skeleton joints into several groups to capture the inter-group
and inter-group interactions. The global input-dependent
graph is also learned by Global Context Adaption (GCA) mod-
ule during inference to adaptively determine the relation-
ships of joints. In MV-IGNet, two IGNet models extract
complementary skeleton features by using complement
graphs rather than the same graph, which is simple yet effec-
tive. We describe each functional part of MV-IGNet and its
technical details in the following sections.
3.1
Revisit: GCN for Skeleton Graph
We ﬁrst construct the spatiotemporal skeleton graph and
then revisit several graph convolution networks (GCNs)
that are related to our method.
3.1.1
Skeleton Graph Construction
A skeleton sequence with V joints and T frames can be rep-
resented as a structured spatiotemporal graph G ¼ ðV; EÞ. V
is a node-set including all joints in sequence, and E denotes
skeleton edge set including all connections between joints.
We adopt the prevalent skeleton graph as described in pre-
vious works (e.g., ST-GCN [8]). Speciﬁcally, joints are with
physical connections of the human body in each frame where
each joint is connected to the same joint in the consecutive
frames. For tth frame where Gt ¼ ðVt; EtÞ, the neighbor set of
the ith joint is deﬁned as N t;i ¼ fvt;jjdðvt;i; vt;jÞ  Dg, where
dðvt;i; vt;jÞ denotes the path distance between the ith and jth
joints in graph Gt. We set distance threshold D ¼ 1. The
topology of graph Gt can be represented by adjacency
matrix A 2 RV V
where Ai;j 2 f0; 1g. In this paper, we
mainly focus on learning spatial interactional skeleton
graph, i.e., the relationships of joints within the frame.
Thus, subscript “t” is omitted to simplify formulations, e.g., vi
denotes vt;i without speciﬁc explanation.
3.1.2
Graph Convolution Network
Graph convolution network with fast localized spectral ﬁl-
tering is formulated as follows in [24]:
guðLÞ ¼
X
K1
k¼0
ukTkð~LÞ;
(1)
yc0 ¼
X
C
c¼1
guc;c0 ðLÞxc 2 RV ;
(2)
where yc0 is the c0th output feature map of the input sample,
xc 2 RV are the input feature maps, C; C0 are the number of
input and output channels, and V is the number of nodes in
graph. guðÞ is the polynomial ﬁlter where the parameter u 2
RK is a vector of Chebyshev coefﬁcients and Tkð~LÞ 2 RV V
is the Chebyshev polynomial of order k. Thus, in Eq. (1),
“spectral ﬁlters represented by Kth order polynomials of the Lapla-
cian are exactly K-localized” [24].
A localized ﬁrst-order approximation of above spectral
graph convolutions is proposed in [23]:
Y ¼ ~AXWgcn;
(3)
where X 2 RV C and Y 2 RV C0 are the input and output
feature maps respectively. Wgcn 2 RCC0 is the shared GCN
weight for all joints. ~A 2 RV V is the normalized adjacency
matrix, which means Eq. (3) is 1-localized, i.e., path distance
D ¼ 1.
ST-GCN [8] designs a skeleton-speciﬁc graph convolu-
tion based on Eq. (3):
Y ¼
X
S
s¼1
ð~As  MsÞXWstgcn
s
;
(4)
where different from the K in Eq. (1), S in Eq. (4) is the num-
ber of subsets generated by skeleton partition strategy, Ms is
corresponding sth trainable mask to learn the edge impor-
tance and  is the element-wise multiplication. Compared
to Eq. (3), Eq. (4) has S predeﬁned subsets, S trainable
masks and corresponding S weights fWstgcn
1
; Wstgcn
2
; . . . ;
Wstgcn
S
g, e.g., S ¼ 3 for spatial conﬁguration partitioning in
ST-GCN.
However, ﬁxed interaction pattern and inﬂexible shared
weights in above GCNs inevitably limit its expressiveness
on skeleton modeling. Speciﬁcally, weight sharing induces
that there is no sufﬁcient number of parameters to capture
complex/abundant relationships of joints. Eq. (3) uses only
~A to represent the joints’ interactions and Eq. (4) also has
limited number of parameters ~As  Ms (i.e., S ¼ 3 in ST-
GCN) to extract spatial skeleton context in sth subset. The
above operators only consider a very small number of inter-
action patterns. Fixed graph in GCN results in that the same
interaction pattern is applied to handle different samples of
actions, e.g., the graph topologies in Eqs. (3) and (4) are pre-
deﬁned. But, intuitively we can use more suitable action-
speciﬁc (dynamic) graphs to obtain more representative fea-
tures for different actions. For instance, directly connecting
two hands will make it easier to recognize the action “clap
hands” than using ﬁxed physical topology. To efﬁciently
WANG ET AL.: LEARNING MULTI-VIEW INTERACTIONAL SKELETON GRAPH FOR ACTION RECOGNITION
6943
Authorized licensed use limited to: Zhejiang University. Downloaded on May 15,2026 at 07:50:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.


address the above problems, we propose the Multi-View
Interactional Graph Network (MV-IGNet).
3.2
Learning Local Interactional Graph
In this section, we illustrate how SPG-Conv can efﬁciently
capture joint-level context which is the cornerstone to
extract skeleton features. Since each joint possesses speciﬁc
physical/semantic meaning (different human articulations,
e.g., hand or head), the relationships of joints are usually
complex and cannot be comprehensively represented by
given adjacent matrix A. Due to that the number of joints V
is ﬁxed in each frame (spatial domain), we can readily uti-
lize private weight rather than shared weight to cope with
different interactions of joints, which gives rise to our Sepa-
rable Parametric Graph Convolution (SPG-Conv).
As illustrated in Fig. 2, given skeleton feature X 2 RV C
and joint relationship A 2 RV V , we replace shared weight
Wgcn 2 RCC0 in Eq. (3) by the private weight Wi;j 2 RCC0
to capture the interaction between ith and jth joints (local
context)
Yi ¼
X
vj2N i
1
zi;j
XjWi;j ¼
X
V
j¼1
~Ai;jXjWi;j
¼
X
V
j¼1
Xj ~Ai;jWi;j


¼
X
V
j¼1
Xjf
Wi;j
¼ X?f
Wi;
(5)
where f
Wi 2 R1V CC0 captures the local context of ith joint.
The ﬁnal output feature Y can be computed by
Y ¼ X?f
W ¼ X?½~A  W;
(6)
where  is element-wise multiplication on ½V  V  domain
of f
W 2 RV V CC0, i.e., f
Wi;j ¼ 0 if ~Ai;j ¼ 0. Operation “?”
can be regarded as parametric graph convolution (PG-
Conv) with C input channels and C0 output channels, thus
the size of each graph convolution kernel is V  V  C. To
further enhance the capability of context modeling, we
introduce the practical and efﬁcient variant of PG-Conv, i.e.,
separable parametric graph convolution (SPG-Conv).
Compared to Eqs. (1) and (2), PG-Conv’s graph ﬁlters
operated on inputs have similar size V  V  C  C0. How-
ever, they have totally different number of trainable param-
eters that are used to capture different interactions in graph.
Eq. (1) is a spectral GCN focusing on K localities while PG-
Conv is 1-localized operator on spatial domain. Although
the output size of guc;c0 ðLÞ is V  V , Eq. (1) has only K train-
able parameters. Thus, Eq. (2) only has K  C  C0 trainable
weights, which are too less to capture abundant relation-
ships of joints in skeleton (K cannot be a large value due to
the small size of skeleton graph). Our PG-Conv uses more
V  V  C  C0 weights to capture abundant 1-localized
relationships of joints for discriminating complex action
dynamics.
SPG-Conv. In each kernel of PG-Conv, the features of all
C channels are directly aggregated (averaged) without dis-
tinguishing channel-wise interaction patterns. Considering
that skeleton features in different channels (e.g., x; y; z coor-
dinates) may have distinct relationships, we propose SPG-
Conv to exploit this information.
As shown in Fig. 2, SPG-Conv shares a similar high-level
spirit with separable convolution manner of CNN (e.g.,
MobileNet [54], Xception [55]). It splits the PG-Conv layer
into two parts, a depthwise graph convolution layer for
channel-wise ﬁltering and a 1  1 pointwise convolution
layer for feature aggregation. For each input channel C, we
apply one graph convolution kernel with size V  V in
depthwise graph convolution
^X:;c ¼ ð~A  KcÞX:;c
c ¼ 1; 2; 3; . . . ; C;
(7)
where X:;c; ^X:;c 2 RV 1 are the cth channel of input and out-
put features respectively. Kc 2 RV V is cth graph kernel and
 is element-wise multiplication. Pointwise convolution, a
simple 1  1 convolution, is then used to expand the output
of depthwise graph convolution into the other dimension
C0. In this case, SPG-Conv has the same input and output
size as PG-Conv but captures the channel-wise interaction
patterns. It not only drastically reduces computational and
memory cost but also further enhance the graph-adaption
capabilities of the neural network.
According to Eqs. (3) and (5), PG-Conv owns much more
weights than that of GCN as shown in Table 1. The weights
of PG-Conv are derived from ~A which is usually sparse,
Fig. 2. Separable parametric graph convolution and GCN for the local context modeling. The major difference between SPG-Conv and GCN is
whether weight is shared when modeling different interactions. Taking 3-node local graph (V ¼ 3) as an example, GCN applies shared weight for all
edges while PG-Conv assigns private weights for each edge (e.g., W0;2 and W1;3). Thus, there are total 3  3 ¼ 9 private weights with size C  C0.
SPG-Conv separates above weight W 2 RV V CC0 into depth-wise graph convolution weight K 2 RCV V and point-wise weight with size C  C0,
which greatly reduces the memory and computational cost.
TABLE 1
The Comparison Between GCN and SPG-Conv
Methods
computational cost
#params
GCN
NE  C þ V  C  C0
C  C0
PG-Conv
NE  C  C0
NE  C  C0
SPG-Conv
NE  C þ V  C  C0
NE  C þ C  C0
6944
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 45, NO. 6, JUNE 2023
Authorized licensed use limited to: Zhejiang University. Downloaded on May 15,2026 at 07:50:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.


thus the actual computational cost should be NE  C  C0
where NE is the number of nonzero values in ~A. SPG-Conv
splits PG-Conv weights NE  C  C0 into NE  C þ C  C0
which is the sum of the depthwise and pointwise layers,
while the corresponding computational cost is NE  C þ
V  C  C0. We will discuss the efﬁciency of SPG-Conv in
Section 4.4.2.
SPG-Conv enables channel-wise learnable graphs, which
can adapt to whole training dataset in training process by
back-propagation. This superiority facilitates richer local
context and lets SPG-Conv be more compatible with irreg-
ular adjacent matrix A. On the other hand, the ﬁxed graph
A still limits the ﬂexibility of SPG-Conv, e.g., it is not possi-
ble to change the relationships of joints to handle higher-
level context.
3.3
Hierarchical Modeling of Interaction Context
Higher-level semantic features [56] are deﬁnitely essential
to discriminate action representations. However, intra-
group (joint relationships within a group) and inter-group
(groups’ relationships) contexts are not well addressed in
previous works. Thus, we take advantages of SPG-Conv to
extract richer high-level interaction patterns.
Intra-Group Context Modeling. This step describes how to
divide skeleton joints into several groups. SR-TSL [9] has
attempted to manually partition the skeleton into ﬁve parts.
As shown in Fig. 3, we similarly partition body into six
parts, i.e., “head, trunk, left arm, right arm, left leg and right
leg”. Different from SR-TSL that uses FC layers to encode
joints’ features within a group, we learn intra-group context
by separable parametric graph pooling (SPG-pooling).
Given skeleton feature X 2 RV C, SPG-pooling aims to
pool these V joints into U groups via graph convolution. We
use a grouping/pooling matrix AP 2 RUV to represent how
we manually group V skeleton joints into U groups. The ele-
ment AP
u;v indicates the possibility that vth joint belongs to uth
group. In our settings, one joint can only belong to one group,
i.e., AP
u;v 2 f0; 1g and if AP
u;v ¼ 1 then 8w 6¼ u;AP
w;v ¼ 0. To
extract intra-group features, we adopt the same solution as
that of dealing with the local context, i.e., we apply “private”
learnable graph pooling weight Pu;v to learn the relationships
between vth joint and uth group. Similar to SPG-Conv, SPG-
pooling also consists of a depth-wise pooling layer and point-
wise convolution layer. The depth-wise pooling applies one
graph pooling kernel per channel
^X:;c ¼ ð~AP  PcÞX:;c
c ¼ 1; 2; 3; . . . ; C;
(8)
where X:;c 2 RV 1; ^X:;c 2 RU1 are the cth channel of input
and output features respectively. ~AP is the normalized
pooling matrix AP, Pc 2 RUV is cth graph pooling kernel
and  is element-wise multiplication. The point-wise con-
volution layer is the same as that in SPG-Conv. As shown
in Fig. 4, SPG-pooling can be regarded as a variant of SPG-
Conv with depthwise weight P 2 RUV C and given graph
AP. Thus, the total parameter number of SPG-pooling is
U  V  Cþ C  C0.
Inter-Group Context Modeling. Although SPG-pooling
obtains U groups, the interactions among these groups are
not determined. To capture the inter-group context, differ-
ent from deﬁning adjacent matrix to describe groups’ inter-
actions, we don’t provide any prior information about the
relationships of groups, but directly input groups’ features
into SPG-Conv. The graph conﬁguration AG 2 RUU is set
as complete graph (adjacent matrix AG ¼ 1), and with the
help of its strong graph-adaption ability, SPG-Conv can
learn inter-group context itself in training process. Fig. 4
compares our solutions in dealing with joint-level, intra-
group, and inter-group context. We extract the multi-level
skeleton context by SPG-Conv in a uniﬁed way, which
ensures the simplicity and ﬂexibility of neural networks.
3.4
Global Interactional Graph Adaption
As described previously, the ﬁxed graph on spatial domain
restricts the interaction path, which makes it insufﬁcient
and inﬂexible to handle complex actions, e.g., adding new
edges or selecting input-related edges is infeasible.
Many works [8], [53] have attempted to address above
problem by introducing attention. But most of existing
attention-based techniques cannot be directly applied in our
SPG-Conv, e.g., original self-attention [34] or nonlocal
Fig. 3. Hierarchical modeling of interaction context. The skeleton is man-
ually divided into six parts, which can be represented by pooling matrix
AP . For the intra-group context, we ﬁrst embed V joints into U groups by
SPG-pooling. After that, a complete graph AG is applied to let SPG-
Conv learn inter-group context during training.
Fig. 4. Proposed uniﬁed layers for multi-level skeleton context modeling. All layers receive the output of the previous layer as input. Local, intra-group
and inter-group context can be captured by SPG-Conv with different weights and graph settings, i.e., A, AP and AG respectively. Graph setting of
GCA layer is dynamically generated from input X by GCA module: given input skeleton sequence X, GCA generates input-dependent graph G by
Eqs. (9) and (10). We replace the given adjacent matrix eA with the learned graph G in SPG-Conv, and perform the element-wise multiplication G  K
on ½V  V  domain. In this case, the depth-wise weight is updated according to input-dependent graph G in training process.
WANG ET AL.: LEARNING MULTI-VIEW INTERACTIONAL SKELETON GRAPH FOR ACTION RECOGNITION
6945
Authorized licensed use limited to: Zhejiang University. Downloaded on May 15,2026 at 07:50:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.


network [35]. In vanilla CNN, it’s no matter for the non-
local network to aggregate features before convolutional
operations, because CNN’s kernels are shared for all posi-
tions in the image. However, SPG-Conv kernels are private
for each edge, i.e., weight f
Wi;j is only used to learn the inter-
action between ith and jth joints. In this case, feature aggre-
gation before SPG-Conv will bring unexpected “noise” for
weight f
Wi;j and further confuse the optimization process.
To solve the above problem, we propose global context
adaption (GCA) layer which aims to “select” speciﬁc input-
related weight f
Wi;j rather than directly weighting features.
Global Context Adaption Module. The objective of GCA is
to learn an input-dependent interactional graph. Different
from nonlocal/self-attention, given input X 2 RCTV , we
utilize private weight W u
i ; W f
j 2 RC0C (C0 ¼ C=2) to gener-
ate the relationship between ith and jth joints
gðXi; XjÞ ¼ uiðXiÞTfjðXjÞ ¼ sðW u
i XiÞTsðW f
j XjÞ;
(9)
Gi;j ¼
1
CðXÞ gðXi; XjÞ;
(10)
where Xi 2 RCT1 is the spatiotemporal feature of ith joint
and s reshapes C0  T  1 of W u
i Xi into C0T  1. The input-
dependent graph G 2 RV V is normalized by factor CðXÞ,
where CðXÞ ¼ PV
j¼1 gðXi; XjÞ and V is the number of joints.
As discussed above, graph G cannot be applied on feature
X directly, i.e., GX in GCN. In the following, we will show
how to apply G on SPG-Conv weights W to construct GCA
layer.
Global Context Adaption Layer. There is a crucial difference
between GCA and non-local in constructing the convolution
block. As shown in Fig. 4, the ultimate goal of GCA is to
adaptively “select” speciﬁc weight f
Wi;j in SPC-Conv rather
than directly weighting features. For the input spatiotempo-
ral feature X 2 RCV T, GCA layer ﬁrst obtains input-
dependent graph G by Eqs. (9) and (10). After that, this
learned graph G is used as a new skeleton topology
(weighted graph) to dynamically replace the graph setting
eA of SPG-Conv in Eq. (5)
Yi ¼
X
V
j¼1
Gi;jXjWi;j:
(11)
In GCA layer, SPG-Conv weight Wi;j is updated only when
it’s selected by Gi;j in training process. Thus the selective
manner of GCA layer jointly optimizes weight selection
(global context) and weight values. In the implementation,
we ﬁrst perform element-wise multiplication between G
and SPG-Conv’s depthwise weight K and then feed input
feature X into updated SPG-Conv to get the ﬁnal output.
Fig. 4 illustrates the relationships between GCA and pro-
posed other layers. We implement these layers in a uniﬁed
manner which is very simple yet efﬁcient. They both take
SPG-Conv as a basic unit but receive different graphs as
input to learn the spatial context of different levels. Thus,
it’s very easy to construct an efﬁcient framework, interac-
tional graph network (IGNet), for skeleton-based action rec-
ognition as shown in Section 3.5.
3.5
Interactional Graph Network
As shown in Fig. 5, IGNet is a two-stream network. Each
stream consists of several stacked spatiotemporal convolu-
tion (STC) blocks which are used to hierarchically capture
spatiotemporal concurrence skeleton features.
Spatio-Temporal Convolution (STC) Block. The proposed
STC block is similar to ST-GCN [8] except that we replace
the GCN by our SPG-Conv/SPG-pooling/GCA layers on
the spatial domain. Given input skeleton feature X 2
RCTV , we ﬁrst perform spatial convolution. After that, the
temporal context is captured by a vanilla 2D convolution
with kernel size t  1. We also employ temporal separable
convolution as described in MobileNet [54] to ensure the
balance of parameter number on spatial and temporal
domains. A residual connection is added in each block to
stabilize the training process when the block is SPG-Conv
or GCA block. For SPG-pooling block, we omit residual con-
nection to avoid the dimension mismatch.
Two-Stream. We adopt the two-stream architecture of
which the effectiveness has been proved in video-based
action recognition tasks. The position stream considers the
location information while the motion stream is designed to
model the action dynamic cues. These two features are com-
plementary to each other in action recognition. Position
stream inputs the coordinates of skeleton sequence X, while
the input of motion stream is the displacement of skeleton
joints, which can be calculated by two consecutive frames,
i.e., Xtþ1  Xt. We add a data BatchNorm layer for each
stream to normalize input data and perform global spatio-
temporal pooling after the last layer to obtain ﬁnal features.
The output scores of two streams are averaged after
softmax layer to predict actions.
Architecture Settings. Each stream stacks 6 STC blocks. It
is very shadow when compared with previous GCN-based
models (e.g., 9 blocks in ST-GCN [8]). Output channels of
blocks are set as 64; 64; 128; 128; 256 and 256 respectively.
Fig. 5. The two-stream architecture of IGNet. Motion and position streams stack the same 6 spatiotemporal convolution (STC) blocks. STC block is
similar to that of ST-GCN but employs our SPG/GCA/SPG-pooling layers rather than GCN to extract spatial features. We don’t add residual conv in
pooling block due to dimension mismatch.
6946
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 45, NO. 6, JUNE 2023
Authorized licensed use limited to: Zhejiang University. Downloaded on May 15,2026 at 07:50:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.


The ﬁrst 2 blocks are SPG-Conv layers with graph setting A,
which are used to encode sufﬁcient features for GCA. Then,
the 3rd GCA layer can select proper weights which discov-
ers latent signiﬁcant interactions beyond the given A. The
followed SPG-pooling block reduces the number of joints
from V to U (usually U < V ). After that, two GCA block
are used to learn the relationship of groups, in which SPG-
Conv receives U  U complete graph. In this way, the multi-
level spatial context is captured by IGNet.
3.6
From Single View to Multiple Views
Although IGNet can automatically learn the global topo-
logies from inputs, it faces a dilemma that the search
space of GCA is too large to ﬁnd the optimal topology.
GCA needs to estimate the importance of all possible V 
V candidates/edges, but features usually cannot guarantee
this large space searching. Too many “noisy” edges for
each joint will confuse the optimization process (See
Section 4.4.4). To alleviate the above weaknesses, we fur-
ther enhance the ability to learn joint dependency by gen-
erating multi-view features.
Generally, different camera views can provide comple-
mentary information of skeleton, which can be represented
as afﬁne transformations on original coordinates, i.e., C
dimension of skeleton data X 2 RCV . We can deﬁne differ-
ent graphs as transformations on V dimension of X, i.e.,
graph convolution. Similar to the “isomers” in chemistry,
two skeleton graphs that have the same joints but different
topologies can reﬂect different properties of the human skel-
eton. Thus, graph topology is also a critical perspective to
offer complementary information. When we use different
graphs to cooperatively represent the same action, features
generated from different topologies should be complemen-
tary. In this way, we propose the multi-view interactional
graph network (MV-IGNet) to extract features with differ-
ent graphs.
Multi-View Generation. We ﬁrst show how to get different
graphs for multi-view learning. Given spatial skeleton
topology A0 (physical), we expect to use a different topology
A1 to construct a new skeleton structure for the same data
X. Intuitively, there are two fundamental requirements for
A1: 1) Complementarity: the A1 should possess as much com-
plementary information as possible, which indicates lower
similarity between A0 and A1. 2) Feasibility: the A1 that
doesn’t harm the performance of our method, should be
easily found. Therefore, due to the strong graph-adaption
capability of SPG-Conv, we adopt the simplest approach to
obtain different topologies by ﬁnding the complement/
inverse graph of A0. The complement A1 of a graph A0 is a
graph on the same joints such that two distinct joints of A1
are adjacent if and only if they are not adjacent in A0.
Namely, these two graphs have no common edges. In
implementation, we get A1 by
A1 ¼ 1  A0;
(12)
where A1 is the adjacent matrix of complement graph of A0,
and 8A0
i;j 2 f0; 1g, A0
i;j þ A1i;j ¼ 1. A1 is a complementary
way to describe the skeleton and SPG-Conv can discover
optimal interaction patterns within A1 in training process.
Multi-View Interactional Graph Network. MV-IGNet targets
at using above generated multi-views, A1 and A0, to extract
complementary features. As shown in Fig. 6, MV-IGNet is
an ensemble model consisting of two IGNet models which
are trained independently except being given different
graphs (A0 and A1 respectively). Each model takes the same
position and motion data as inputs, and receive the same
label to supervise the action classiﬁcation. For the test, we
simply average the prediction scores of two IGNet models.
Different from the GCA in IGNet, search spaces of GCA
modules in MV-IGNet are constrained by two graphs A1
and A0 respectively
^Gn ¼ An  Gn;
(13)
Yi ¼
X
V
j¼1
^Gn
i;jXjWi;j;
(14)
where G is the input-dependent graph generated by
Eq. (10), ^G is the constrained graph (see Figs. 4 and 6),  is
element-wise multiplication and n denotes the nth IGNet
model in MV-IGNet. In this case, the search spaces are con-
ditioned on the given graph An to avoid topology conﬂicts
and ensure complementary information. Thus, parameter
numbers of two models are slightly different because valid
number N1
E of graph A1 is larger than that of A0.
Note that SPG-Conv has strong adaption ability to han-
dle many irregular topologies that other methods don’t
have (see Section 4.4.2). This superiority guarantees the
high performance of IGNet with large graph A1. Therefore,
MV-IGNet possesses strong robustness and can dramati-
cally improve the action recognition performance.
4
EXPERIMENTS
4.1
Datasets and Implementation
NTU-RGB+D. This dataset [12] contains total 56,000 video
clips with 60 action classes in total, which are divided into
three major groups: 40 daily actions, 9 health-related
actions, and 11 mutual actions. We adopt two standard
evaluation protocols deﬁned in [12] for this dataset: Cross-
Subject (CS) and Cross-View (CV). In Cross-Subject proto-
col, the 40 subjects are split into training and testing
groups. Each group consists of 20 subjects. For Cross-View
Fig. 6. MV-IGNet. It consists of two ensemble IGNet models with differ-
ent graphs (A0 and A1). We only show some necessary layers in MV-
IGNet. These two models are trained independently and their prediction
scores are averaged to get ﬁnal results for the test.
WANG ET AL.: LEARNING MULTI-VIEW INTERACTIONAL SKELETON GRAPH FOR ACTION RECOGNITION
6947
Authorized licensed use limited to: Zhejiang University. Downloaded on May 15,2026 at 07:50:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.


evaluation, all the samples of the camera 2 and 3 are used
for training and samples of camera 1 are used for testing.
NTU-RGB+D 120. NTU-RGB+D 120 dataset [57] extends
above NTU RGB+D dataset [12] by adding another 60 clas-
ses and another 57,600 video samples, i.e., NTU RGB+D 120
has 120 classes and 114,480 samples in total, which are
divided into three major groups, including 82 daily actions,
12 health-related actions, and 26 mutual actions. We adopt
two standard evaluation protocols deﬁned in [57] for this
dataset: Cross-Subject (CSub) and cross-setup (CSet). For
cross-subject evaluation, the 106 subjects are split into train-
ing and testing groups. Each group consists of 53 subjects.
For cross-setup evaluation, we pick all the samples with
even collection setup IDs for training, and those with odd
setup IDs for testing, i.e., 16 setups are used for training,
and the other 16 setups are reserved for testing.
Northwestern-UCLA. This dataset [58] contains 1,494
video clips covering 10 categories and is captured by three
Kinect cameras simultaneously from a variety of view-
points. Each action sample contains RGB+D and human
skeleton data performed by 10 different subjects. The evalu-
ation protocol is the same as [58]. Samples from the ﬁrst two
cameras constitute the training set and samples from the
other camera constitute the testing dataset.
Implementation Details. We change the width of the neural
network by width multiplier a. Without speciﬁc explanation,
the settings of IGNet are shown in Fig. 5, i.e, width multiplier
a ¼ 1:0 and skeleton graph conﬁguration is physical A0. In
experiments, we resize skeleton sequence into a ﬁxed-length T
as input on temporal dimension, and set T ¼ 200, 200 and 75
for NTU, NTU-120, and UCLA respectively. Motion data is
generated by calculating the displacement of coordinates
between consecutive 1 frames, i.e., Xtþ1  Xt. Global pooling is
applied to obtain ﬁnal features followed by a fully-connected
layer for classiﬁcation. During training, IGNet is optimized by
SGD for 120 epochs with initial learning rate 0.2 decayed by
0.1 after ½40; 80; 100 epoch. Dropout with a probability of 0.5 is
adopted to avoid over-ﬁtting. Batch sizes for the NTU&NTU-
120 and UCLA are 64 and 24 respectively. Width multiplier a
is set as 1.0 for NTU&NTU-120 and 0.5 for UCLA dataset.
4.2
Baselines
We introduce following baselines for comparison and their
differences are shown in Table 2.
1.
ST-GCN: for a fair comparison, similar to IGNet, we
build two-stream ST-GCN [8] by adding motion
branch. ST-GCN is the original method in [8], ST-
GCN is its two-stream variant, and S-ST-GCN is
the variant of ST-GCN with separable convolution.
2.
SPGNet: it adopts 6-block two-stream architecture
which replaces SPG-pooling and GCA blocks in
IGNet with SPG-Conv blocks.
3.
HPGNet: it replaces GCA blocks in IGNet with SPG-
Conv blocks. The number of joints is reduced from V
to U in HPGNet.
4.
IGNet: this is proposed interactional graph network
(IGNet) as shown in Fig. 5.
5.
MV-HPGNet:
this
is
the
multi-view
variant
of
HPGNet. We build it by giving two complementary
graphs to ensemble HPGNet models.
6.
MV-IGNet: this is the complete version of MV-IGNet
with ensemble IGNet models as shown in Fig. 6.
4.3
Ablation Study
Extensive ablation studies are performed to validate the
effectiveness of each contribution. Table 2 reports the results
of all baselines on NTU-RGB+D dataset (cross-subject and
cross-view protocols).
Two-Stream. Table 3 compares the performance of SPGNet
models with motion and position streams respectively. The
two-stream model outperforms one-stream-based models.
SPG-Conv. We compare the results of ST-GCN, S-ST-
GCN, and SPGNet on NTU-RGB+D dataset in Table 2. We
set width multiplier a ¼ 1:0, i.e., the output channels are set
according to Fig. 5. Fig. 7 evaluates the effects of network
width, which shows the results of above baselines with dif-
ferent channel width, i.e., a ¼ 0:5; 1:0; 1:5; and 2.0 respec-
tively. Note that joints are connected according to physical
TABLE 2
Accuracy and Efﬁciency Comparisons on Cross-Subject (CS) and Cross-View (CV) Protocols of NTU-RGB+D Dataset
No.
Method
Separable
SPG
Pool
GCA
MV
CS
CV
#time (ms)
#params (M)
0
ST-GCN [8]
81.5
88.3
3.426
3.103
2s-AGCN [38]
88.5
95.1
8.862
6.940
1
ST-GCN
81.7
91.2
6.851
6.206
S-ST-GCN
@
80.9
89.8
4.328
2.048
2
SPGNet
@
@
86.8
94.3
0.845
0.848
3
HPGNet
@
@
@
87.2
94.7
0.553
0.793
4
IGNet
@
@
@
@
87.5
94.9
0.815
0.887
5
MV-HPGNet
@
@
@
@
88.6
95.8
1.106
1.650
6
MV-IGNet
@
@
@
@
@
88.8
96.1
1.630
1.838
We show the architecture difference of our baselines and also report their inference time (ms) and parameter number (M) to demonstrate the advantages of our
method. MV-IGNet can achieve satisfactory results with smaller model size and faster inference.
TABLE 3
Accuracy (%) of SPGNet Models on NTU-RGB+D
method
conﬁguration
CS
CV
#params
SPGNet
two stream
86.8
94.3
0.848M
SPGNet
position
84.1
92.4
0.424M
SPGNet
motion
83.8
91.8
0.424M
a ¼ 1:0
6948
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 45, NO. 6, JUNE 2023
Authorized licensed use limited to: Zhejiang University. Downloaded on May 15,2026 at 07:50:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.


relationships for all baselines in Table 2 and Fig. 7. The
number of parameters is calculated according to the number
of nonzero values NE. SPG-Conv uses fewer parameters
than ST-GCN but outperforms ST-GCN by a large margin
and #param-accuracy curve also shows SPG-Conv is more
efﬁcient and effective than GCN.
SPG-Pooling. Comparing the results of SPGNet (w/o SPG-
pooling) and HPGNet (w/ SPG-pooling) in Table 2, we show
that HPGNet uses fewer weights but achieves stably better
accuracy than SPGNet on both CS and CV protocols, which
proves the signiﬁcance of higher-level context.
GCA Module. Table 2 compares the results of HPGNet
(w/o GCA module) and IGNet (w/ GCA module). IGNet
outperforms HPGNet by about 0.3 percent in both CS and
CV protocols, which indicates adaptively selecting input-
dependent interactions can also help to recognize actions.
Multi-Views.
In
Table
2,
compared
to
IGNet
and
HPGNet, MV-IGNet and MV-HPGNet obtain the signiﬁ-
cant improvements, showing the vital contribution of com-
plementary views.
4.4
Model Analysis
We ﬁrst show the overall memory and computational efﬁ-
ciency of our method and then perform the robustness anal-
ysis of each module respectively.
4.4.1
Memory and Computational Efﬁciency
The experimental settings are described in Section 4.1. We
use the average inference time (ms) per sample to represent
the running speed, which is evaluated on single Nvidia
RTX 2080Ti and Pytorch platform. Table 2 reports the infer-
ence time and parameter number of different methods,
proving that our method is indeed efﬁcient. Our HPGNet is
the fastest model with the least parameter number, and
MV-IGNet can obtain higher accuracy.
Many recent works [38], [51], [53] are based on ST-
GCN [8] but introduce additional parameters and computa-
tional cost. These additional modules introduce accuracy
gain but inevitably limits the model efﬁciency. On the con-
trary, our method can reduce memory cost and use less
time to infer while achieving remarkable performance. Tak-
ing 2s-AGCN as example, its inference speed is 8:862 ¼
4:431  2 ms / sample while that of our MV-IGNet is 1.630 ms
/ sample. Our method’s computational efﬁciency majorly
comes from two aspects: 1) the low computational cost of
SPG-Conv that reduces the inference time of each layer; 2)
the shadow hierarchical network that reduces the overall
size of feature maps then increases the running speed.
4.4.2
Separable Parametric Graph Convolution
SPG-Conv not only can obtain higher accuracy with fewer
weights but also owns strong graph-adaption capability that
GCN doesn’t have. Namely, it can achieve high performance
even though being given irregular skeleton topologies.
SPG-Conv versus GCN. SPG-Conv sets multi-graphs as
parameters to enrich local context, which ensures its special
superiority. While ST-GCN is a GCN-based model with
hand-craft skeleton graph partition algorithm, which splits
the neighbor set into 3 subsets, thus employs 3 independent
GCN weights to capture spatial features. According to
Table 1, compared to ST-GCN, SPG-Conv reduces the num-
ber of parameters by
NE  C þ C  C0
3  C  C0
¼ NE
3C0 þ 1
3 ;
(15)
where for NTU-RGB+D dataset (V ¼ 25; E ¼ 24), NE ¼
V þ 2E ¼ 73 and C0 	 64, SPG-Conv uses at most 72 percent
weights of ST-GCN on spatial domain (52.3 percent for
C0 ¼ 128).
The Effects of Graph Conﬁgurations in SPG-Conv Layer. To
evaluate it, we introduce following skeleton graph conﬁgu-
rations as shown in Fig. 8: 1) joint: a graph only has self-
loops, without connections between arbitrary two joints; 2)
edge: a graph (A0  I) has physical connections but without
self-loops; 3) physical: a graph (A0) has physical connections;
4) complete: complete graph, i.e., 8Ai;j ¼ 1.
Fig. 7. #Param-accuracy curve on NTU-RGB+D (CV). For S-ST-GCN
and SPG-Conv, width multiplier a ¼ 0:5; 1:0; 1:5; 2:0. The basic output
channels of ST-GCN are f64; 64; 64; 128; 128; 128; 256; 256; 256g (a ¼ 1:0)
and we only plot a ¼ 0:5; 1:0; 1:5 for ST-GCN. The performance of base-
lines has an obvious positive correlation with the parameter number.
SPGNet outperforms ST-GCN on both efﬁciency and accuracy.
Fig. 8. Visualizing the weights of SPG-Conv. The left shows the different graphs of skeleton: complete, joint, edge and physical respectively. Values in
these graphs are the summation of graph kernels K in SPG-Conv. The right colorful skeletons show the weights of SPGNet-physical in skeleton form.
Joints and edges show different importance learned by SPG-Conv. Zoom in for the best visualization.
WANG ET AL.: LEARNING MULTI-VIEW INTERACTIONAL SKELETON GRAPH FOR ACTION RECOGNITION
6949
Authorized licensed use limited to: Zhejiang University. Downloaded on May 15,2026 at 07:50:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.


Table 4 compares the adaptive capability of ST-GCN
and SPGNet with different topologies of skeleton graphs.
For joint setting, the decline in accuracy of SPGNet is less
than that of ST-GCN. SPGNet-edge achieves nearly the
same accuracy with SPGNet-physical. Above observations
indicate that compared to self-loops, interactions among
joints are more important in representing actions. Note that
complete setting does not contain any prior information.
SPGNet-complete performs similarly as SPGNet-physical,
which demonstrates the ability of SPG-Conv to extract com-
plementary features from other graphs (beyond physical
connections). In summary, all SPGNet models perform sat-
isfactorily and ST-GCN fails in some extreme cases, which
reﬂects the strong adaption ability of SPG-Conv.
4.4.3
Separable Parametric Graph Pooling
In this section, we mainly explain why we choose hand-craft
partitions for groups rather than letting SPG-pooling learn
to group partitions itself.
Which Stage to Add SPG-Pooling Layer? Table 5 compares a
single SPG-pooling block on the different stages of HPGNet.
The improvements of the SPG-pooling on 3; 4; 5; 6th layers
are obvious while pooling on the ﬁrst layer will reduce the
overall accuracy. One possible explanation is that features
on shadow layers cannot well represent spatiotemporal con-
currence features thus are not sufﬁcient to provide precise
semantic information. Thus we set 4th block as SPG-pooling
block in the following experiments.
The Effects of Group Number U in SPG-Pooling Layer. We
show the results of HPGNet when SPG-pooling receives a
complete graph AP ¼ 1 instead of hand-craft pooling
matrix. Table 6 reports the relationships between accuracy
and U. The joint number of NTU-RGB+D dataset is V ¼ 25,
thus we set U ¼ 20; 15; 10 and 6 respectively to choose a rel-
atively better value of U. The 4th block is set as SPG-pooling
block in HPGNet. When U ¼ V ¼ 25, HPGNet is same as
SPGNet. For 8 U < V except U ¼ 1, HPGNet outperforms
SPGNet, which means higher-level context is essential in
representing actions.
The Effects of Graph Conﬁgurations in SPG-Pooling Layer.
The hand-craft approach partitions joints into 6 groups as
shown in Fig. 3. Table 4 compares SPG-pooling with manual
or complete graphs when U ¼ 6. There is no clear difference
in performance of HPGNet models in Table 4, but HPGNet
(AP ¼ 1) has more parameters than HPGNet-manual. Con-
sidering both accuracy and computational cost, we adopt
manual partitions for SPG-pooling in all the following
experiments.
4.4.4
Global Context Adaption Module
Which Stage to Add GCA Layer? In IGNet, we set the ﬁrst 2
blocks as SPG-Conv rather than GCA blocks for the follow-
ing reason: Table 7 shows that this modiﬁcation doesn’t
harm ﬁnal performance. The accuracy drops to 94.7 only
when we set {1,2,3} stages as SPG-Conv blocks in IGNet.
GCA versus Nonlocal. To prove the advantages of GCA,
we replace GCA modules by nonlocal blocks [35] in IGNet
for comparison. As discussed in Section 3.4, different from
the original dot-product version of nonlocal block proposed
in [35], GCA doesn’t aggregate features before convolution
but adopts weight-selection manner. Table 4 compares the
results of IGNet-nonlocal and IGNet-GCA. Due to the
shared-weight mechanism, our IGNet with nonlocal blocks
cannot obtain satisfactory results and IGNet-GCA can
improve accuracy to some degree. That’s the reason why
we devise the novel GCA module for SPG-Conv. Examples
are also visualized in Fig. 9 to show how GCA module
works (see Section 4.4.5).
4.4.5
Multi-Views
To comprehensively evaluate the proposed MV-IGNet, we
introduce following additional baselines in Table 8: 1) Wide-
HPGNet: this is wider HPGNet (width multiplier a ¼ 2:0).
2) Ensemble HPGNet: this is ensemble HPGNet (HPGNet j
HPGNet in Table 8) in which two HPGNet models have the
same graph A0. 3) Single view ST-GCNj HPGNet (A0jA0):
TABLE 4
Comparison Test on the NTU-RGB+D
Method
conﬁguration
CS
CV
ST-GCN
joint
78.6
87.1
edge
81.4
90.8
physical
81.7
91.2
complete
73.3
83.2
SPGNet
joint
85.5
93.2
edge
86.8
94.2
physical
86.8
94.3
complete
86.6
94.2
HPGNet
manual AP
87.1
94.7
AP ¼ 1
87.2
94.7
IGNet
nonlocal
87.0
94.5
GCA
87.5
94.9
a ¼ 1:0.
TABLE 5
Accuracy (%) on NTU-RGB+D
Stage
-
1
2
3
4
5
6
CV
94.3
94.0
94.3
94.7
94.7
94.6
94.5
SPG-pooling block is insert into different stages of HPGNet models and ”-”
indicates the SPGNet model without pooling. a ¼ 1:0.
TABLE 6
Results (%) of HPGNet Models With
Different U on NTU-RGB+D
U
25
20
15
10
6
1
CV
94.3
94.4
94.6
94.7
94.7
94.1
TABLE 7
Accuracy (%) on NTU-RGB+D
w/o stages
-
1
{1,2}
{1,2,3}
CV
94.9
94.9
94.9
94.7
GCA is removed in some stages of IGNet.
6950
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 45, NO. 6, JUNE 2023
Authorized licensed use limited to: Zhejiang University. Downloaded on May 15,2026 at 07:50:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.


this is an ensemble network with same graph A0 but differ-
ent backbones. 4) Multi view ST-GCNj HPGNet (A0jA1): this
is a multi-view network with different graphs and different
backbones.
Multi-Views versus Ensemble. Multi-view baselines out-
perform all of the other methods by a large margin. Espe-
cially, MV-HPGNet performs better than ensemble HPGNet
while ensemble HPGNet obtains nearly the same results
with Wide-HPGNet. Considering the results of Wide-
HPGNet and HPGNet j HPGNet in Table 8, the perfor-
mance gain of MV-HPGNet mainly comes from multi-views
rather than the number of parameters.
The Generality of Multi-View. Most importantly, we com-
bine ST-GCNj and HPGNet models with or without multi-
views to validate whether MV is general among graph-
based methods. We set physical connection A0 as the graph
of ST-GCN and give its complement graph A1 to HPGNet.
Table 8 also shows the advantages of MV, which can gener-
ally improve the performance across graph-based methods
by integrating complementary features.
4.4.6
Qualitative Results
Static Interaction Patterns Learned by SPG-Conv. Fig. 8 shows
the weights of SPG-Conv layer in SPGNet with complete,
joint, edge and physical graphs. We visualize the mean of
learned graph kernel K ¼ 1
C
PC
c¼1 K:;c in matrix form and
also show each channel K:;c of SPGNet-physical in the form
of skeleton. SPGNet-complete learns the relative importance
of both joints and edges. SPGNet-physical gives arms, head
and legs high importance. Most importantly, it can learn
more abundant interaction patterns than the baseline (ST-
GCN has only S ¼ 3 masks), i.e., it obtains a set of diverse
weighted graphs which indicates different interaction pat-
terns. Since each SPG-Conv layer has C graph ﬁlters with
size V  V where C is much larger than S in Eq. (4), the
combination of more abundant patterns ensures a stronger
feature extraction ability, which indeed guarantees better
accuracy and smaller model size than baseline. The weak-
ness of ﬁxed graph is also reported by Fig. 8 that graph-
based methods are limited by ﬁxed skeleton topology which
restricts the information ﬂow path (interactions between
joints). Thus SPG-Conv can only learn the importance
within the predeﬁned topology, which is not ﬂexible and
powerful.
Dynamic Interaction Patterns Learned by GCA. Fig. 9 shows
the input-dependent graphs G learned by GCA module of
IGNet in both matrix and skeleton forms. Compared to
SPGNet with ﬁxed graph topology in Fig. 8, Fig. 9 illustrates
that IGNet can learn more reasonable interactions beyond
the predeﬁned one. For instance, for the action ”take off a
hat”, it learns new interactions between hand and head that
physical graph doesn’t have, which can better represent the
relationships between head and hands. Moreover, person
usually needs to bend down to accomplish the action “take
off a shoe”, thus GCA module gives high importance to the
hand$foot and head$foot interactions. Action “jump up” and
“stand up” may be similar at the beginning, thus GCA mod-
ule learns similar interaction patterns for these two actions.
On the other hand, Fig. 9 also reveals the weakness of the
GCA module that too many edges are selected, which may
increase the difﬁculty of optimization.
4.5
Comparison With the State-of-the-Arts
NTU-RGB+D. According to Fig. 7, SPGNet approaches the
upper-bound of performance when width multiplier a
1:5. Thus, Table 9 reports the results of MV-IGNet with a ¼
1:0 and 1.5 for comparison. MV-IGNet (a ¼ 1:5) outperforms
MV-IGNet (a ¼ 1:0) by about 0.4 and 0.2 percent accuracy on
CS and CV protocols respectively. MV-IGNet (a ¼ 1:5)
achieves the best accuracy on CV protocol and gets compara-
ble results with the state-of-the-art on CS protocol.
Compared with others, MV-IGNet outperforms current
best LSTM based method AGC-LSTM [52] on both CS and
CV. ST-GCN [8] is mostly relative to ours. We obtain huge
improvements compared to ST-GCN, which shows the
importance of spatial interaction context again. Compared to
CNN-based method HCN [10], SPGNet surpasses it by about
0.3 and 2.8 percent on CS and CV respectively. AS-GCN [51],
AGC-LSTM [52] and 2s-AGCN [38] are GCN-based methods
with different attention mechanisms, and their architectures
are based on ST-GCN [8] but more complex, which means
their parameter numbers and computational costs are larger
than that of ST-GCN. Thus our MV-IGNet surpasses them in
both accuracy and efﬁciency. DGNN [53] designs a directed
Fig. 9. Visualizing the input-dependent graphs G learned by GCA modules on NTU-RGB+D dataset. Joint number V ¼ 25 and its conﬁguration is
shown in [57]. For better understanding, we simplify the skeleton graph in Fig. 8 by grouping joints in hand and foot as one joint. Four graphs corre-
sponding to different actions are shown. We use “red” lines to point out interactions with high importance. Zoom in for the best visualization.
TABLE 8
Accuracy (%) on NTU-RGB+D
Method
conf.
CS
CV
#params
Wide-HPGNet
A0; a ¼ 2:0
87.3
94.9
2.960M
HPGNet j HPGNet
A0jA0
87.4
95.0
1.586M
ST-GCNj HPGNet
A0jA0
86.8
94.9
6.999M
ST-GCNj HPGNet
A0jA1
87.3
95.3
7.031M
MV-HPGNet
A0jA1
88.6
95.8
1.650M
MV-IGNet
A0jA1
88.8
96.1
1.838M
“A0jA1” means two models trained with graphs A0 and A1 independently.
WANG ET AL.: LEARNING MULTI-VIEW INTERACTIONAL SKELETON GRAPH FOR ACTION RECOGNITION
6951
Authorized licensed use limited to: Zhejiang University. Downloaded on May 15,2026 at 07:50:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.


graph neural network (DGNN). The two-step updating of
DGNN, i.e., vertex-updating followed by edge-updating pro-
cess, is a little bit complex and not straightforward, and the
input data of DGNN is also different from other mainstream
methods. It’s difﬁcult to directly compare our MV-IGNet with
DGNN. MV-IGNet outperforms DGNN on CV protocol but
gets lower accuracy than DGNN on CS protocol. Compared
to DGNN, the strength of MV-IGNet lies in the easy imple-
mentation, small model size, and fast inference while with
comparable accuracy.
NTU-RGB+D 120. This dataset is newly published and
most of the existing methods have not been tested on this
new dataset yet. For convincing comparison, we not only
compare the results reported in NTU RGB+D 120 [57] but
also test all aforementioned baselines in Section 4.2. We fol-
low the test protocol of NTU-RGB+D 120 [57] which is dif-
ferent from that of NTU-RGB+D [12], i.e., we adopt cross-
setup instead of cross-view protocol for test as described in
Section 4.1. Results in Table 10 clearly show the superiority
of the proposed method that MV-IGNet outperforms all
baselines and achieves the state-of-the-art accuracy.
Northwestern-UCLA. As shown in Table 11, the pro-
posed MV-HPGNet again achieves the best accuracy of
93.3 percent on the UCLA dataset, surpassing the previous
state-of-the-art methods. The performance of baselines on
UCLA shows some differences with that on NTU dataset,
i.e., IGNet fails to get better results than HPGNet. One pos-
sible reason is the lack of training data: about 1,500 video
clips of UCLA compared to 56,000 clips of NTU-RGB+D,
which cannot guarantee IGNet’s learning skeleton topolo-
gies and features simultaneously.
5
CONCLUSION
This paper introduces a multi-view interactional graph net-
work (MV-IGNet) for skeleton-based action recognition.
The proposed IGNet can adaptively extract multi-level skel-
eton features while Multi-View (MV) mechanism encour-
ages different IGNet models to generate complementary
features. Separable parametric graph convolution (SPG-
Conv) is designed to enhance spatial modeling capability
while reducing memory and computational cost. We also
design a simple yet effective global context adaption (GCA)
module to automatically “select” proper input-related inter-
actions. On three challenging benchmarks, the proposed
MV-IGNet shows impressive performance and much higher
efﬁciency than other mainstream works.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by National Key Research and
Development Program of China (2016YFB1001003), National
Science
Foundation
of
China
(U20B200011,
U1611461,
U19B2035, 61527804, 61976137), STCSM (18DZ1112300). The
authors would like to acknowledge the (partial) support
from the Open Project Program (No.KBDat1604) of Jiangsu
Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis Technology, Nanjing
University of Information Science & Technology.
REFERENCES
[1]
G. Cheron, I. Laptev, and C. Schmid, “P-CNN: Pose-based CNN
features for action recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput.
Vis., 2015, pp. 3218–3226.
[2]
F. C. Heilbron, V. Escorcia, B. Ghanem, and J. C. Niebles,
“ActivityNet: A large-scale video benchmark for human activity
understanding,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.,
2015, pp. 961–970.
[3]
K. Li and Y. Fu, “Prediction of human activity by discovering tem-
poral sequence patterns,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.,
vol. 36, no. 8, pp. 1644–1657, Aug. 2014.
TABLE 10
Action Recognition Accuracy (%) on NTU-RGB+D 120
Method
C-Subject
C-Setup
Year
Two stream RNN [60]
61.2
63.3
2018
MT-CNN [61]
62.2
61.8
2018
Pose Evolution Map [62]
64.6
66.9
2018
ST-GCN
75.9
78.2
2018
SPGNet
80.9
82.4
-
HPGNet
81.3
83.1
-
IGNet
81.5
83.4
-
MV-HPGNet
83.5
85.4
-
MV-IGNet
83.9
85.6
-
TABLE 11
Action Recognition Accuracy (%) on UCLA Dataset
Methods
Accuracy (%)
Year
Lie group [41]
74.2
2014
Actionlet ensemble [63]
76.0
2014
HBRNN-L [59]
78.5
2015
Visualization CNN [13]
86.1
2017
Ensemble TS-LSTM [64]
89.2
2017
AGC-LSTM [52]
93.3
2019
ST-GCN
88.1
2018
SPGNet
91.3
-
HPGNet
91.5
-
IGNet
91.3
-
MV-HPGNet
93.3
-
MV-IGNet
93.1
-
TABLE 9
Action Recognition Accuracy (%) on NTU-RGB+D
Method
CS
CV
Year
HBRNN-L [59]
59.1
64.0
2015
PA-LSTM [12]
62.9
70.3
2016
TG-LSTM-TS [45]
69.2
77.7
2016
Two stream RNN [60]
71.3
79.5
2017
Temporal Conv [49]
74.3
83.1
2017
C-CNN + MTLN [48]
79.6
84.8
2017
VA-LSTM [42]
79.4
87.6
2017
ST-GCN [8]
81.5
88.3
2018
DPRL+GCNN [15]
83.5
89.8
2018
HCN [10]
86.5
91.1
2018
SR-TSL [9]
84.8
92.4
2018
AS-GCN [51]
86.8
94.2
2019
AGC-LSTM [52]
89.2
95.0
2019
2s-AGCN [38]
88.5
95.1
2019
4s-DGNN [53]
89.9
96.1
2019
MV-IGNet (a ¼ 1:0)
88.8
96.1
-
MV-IGNet (a ¼ 1:5)
89.2
96.3
-
6952
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 45, NO. 6, JUNE 2023
Authorized licensed use limited to: Zhejiang University. Downloaded on May 15,2026 at 07:50:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.


[4]
S. Yeung, O. Russakovsky, N. Jin, M. Andriluka, G. Mori, and
L. Fei-Fei, “Every moment counts: Dense detailed labeling of
actions in complex videos,” Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 126, no. 2–4,
pp. 375–389, 2018.
[5]
Z. Cao, T. Simon, S.-E. Wei, and Y. Sheikh, “Realtime multi-person
2D pose estimation using part afﬁnity ﬁelds,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2017, pp. 1302–1310.
[6]
R. A. G€uler, N. Neverova, and I. Kokkinos, “DensePose: Dense
human pose estimation in the wild,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2018, pp. 7297–7306.
[7]
Z. Zhang, “Microsoft kinect sensor and its effect,” IEEE MultiMe-
dia, vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 4–10, Feb. 2012.
[8]
Y. Sijie, Y. Xiong, and D. Lin, “Spatial temporal graph convolu-
tional networks for skeleton-based action recognition,” in Proc.
30th AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2018, pp. 7444–7452.
[9]
C. Si, Y. Jing, W. Wang, L. Wang, and T. Tan, “Skeleton-based
action recognition with spatial reasoning and temporal stack
learning,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2018, pp. 106–121.
[10] C. Li, Q. Zhong, D. Xie, and S. Pu, “Co-occurrence feature learn-
ing from skeleton data for action recognition and detection with
hierarchical aggregation,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell.,
2018, pp. 786–792.
[11] S. Song, C. Lan, J. Xing, W. Zeng, and J. Liu, “An end-to-end spatio-
temporal attention model for human action recognition from skele-
ton data,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2017, pp. 4263–4270.
[12] A. Shahroudy, J. Liu, T.-T. Ng, and G. Wang, “NTU RGB+D: A
large scale dataset for 3D human activity analysis,” in Proc. IEEE
Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2016, pp. 1010–1019.
[13] M. Liu, H. Liu, and C. Chen, “Enhanced skeleton visualization for
view invariant human action recognition,” Pattern Recognit.,
vol. 68, pp. 346–362, 2017.
[14] C. Li, Q. Zhong, D. Xie, and S. Pu, “Skeleton-based action recogni-
tion with convolutional neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Multimedia Expo Workshops, 2017, pp. 597–600.
[15] Y. Tang, Y. Tian, J. Lu, P. Li, and J. Zhou, “Deep progressive rein-
forcement learning for skeleton-based action recognition,” in Proc.
IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2018, pp. 5323–5332.
[16] X. Zhang, C. Xu, X. Tian, and D. Tao, “Graph edge convolutional
neural networks for skeleton based action recognition,” IEEE Trans.
Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., 2020, vol. 31, no. 8, pp. 3047–3060.
[17] C. Si, W. Chen, W. Wang, L. Wang, and T. Tan, “An attention
enhanced graph convolutional LSTM network for skeleton-based
action recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit., 2019, pp. 1227–1236.
[18] K. S. Tai, R. Socher, and C. D. Manning, “Improved semantic rep-
resentations
from
tree-structured
long
short-term
memory
networks,” in Proc. 53rd Annu. Meeting Assoc. Comput. Linguistics
7th Int. Joint Conf. Natural Lang. Process., 2015, pp. 1556–1566.
[19] A. van den Oord, N. Kalchbrenner, and K. Kavukcuoglu, “Pixel
recurrent neural networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2016,
pp. 1747–1756.
[20] D. K. Duvenaud et al., “Convolutional networks on graphs for
learning molecular ﬁngerprints,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Pro-
cess. Syst., 2015, pp. 2224–2232.
[21] X. Qi, R. Liao, J. Jia, S. Fidler, and R. Urtasun, “3D graph neural
networks for RGBD semantic segmentation,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Comput. Vis., 2017, pp. 5209–5218.
[22] R. Li, M. Tapaswi, R. Liao, J. Jia, R. Urtasun, and S. Fidler,
“Situation recognition with graph neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2017, pp. 4183–4192.
[23] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling, “Semi-supervised classiﬁcation with
graph convolutional networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represen-
tations, 2017.
[24] M. Defferrard, X. Bresson, and P. Vandergheynst, “Convolutional
neural networks on graphs with fast localized spectral ﬁltering,”
in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2016, pp. 3837–3845.
[25] J. Bruna, W. Zaremba, A. Szlam, and Y. LeCun, “Spectral net-
works and locally connected networks on graphs,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. Learn. Representations, 2014.
[26] M. Niepert, M. Ahmed, and K. Kutzkov, “Learning convolutional
neural networks for graphs,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2016,
pp. 2014–2023.
[27] J. Zhao, X. Xie, X. Xu, and S. Sun, “Multi-view learning
overview: Recent progress and new challenges,” Inf. Fusion,
vol. 38, pp. 43–54, 2017.
[28] C. Xu, D. Tao, and C. Xu, “A survey on multi-view learning,”
2013, arXiv:1304.5634.
[29] J. Liu, B. Ni, Y. Yan, P. Zhou, S. Cheng, and J. Hu, “Pose transfer-
rable person re-identiﬁcation,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit., 2018, pp. 4099–4108.
[30] X. Chen, C. Xu, X. Yang, and D. Tao, “Attention-GAN for object
transﬁguration in wild images,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis.,
2018, pp. 167–184.
[31] P. Isola, J.-Y. Zhu, T. Zhou, and A. A. Efros, “Image-to-image
translation with conditional adversarial networks,” in Proc. IEEE
Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2017, pp. 5967–5976.
[32] X. Zhang, Y. Wei, J. Feng, Y. Yang, and T. Huang, “Adversarial
complementary learning for weakly supervised object local-
ization,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2018,
pp. 1325–1334.
[33] S. Hou, X. Liu, and Z. Wang, “DualNet: Learn complementary fea-
tures for image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis.,
2017, pp. 502–510.
[34] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2017, pp. 6000–6010.
[35] X. Wang, R. Girshick, A. Gupta, and K. He, “Non-local neural
networks,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2018,
pp. 7794–7803.
[36] X. Wang and A. Gupta, “Videos as space-time region graphs,” in
Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2018, pp. 413–431.
[37] J. Wu, L. Wang, L. Wang, J. Guo, and G. Wu, “Learning actor rela-
tion graphs for group activity recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2019, pp. 9956–9966.
[38] L. Shi, Y. Zhang, J. Cheng, and H. Lu, “Two-stream adaptive
graph convolutional networks for skeleton-based action recog-
nition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2019,
pp. 12018–12027.
[39] M. E. Hussein, M. Torki, M. A. Gowayyed, and M. El-Saban,
“Human action recognition using a temporal hierarchy of covari-
ance descriptors on 3D joint locations,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf.
Artif. Intell., 2013, pp. 2466–2472.
[40] J. Wang, Z. Liu, Y. Wu, and J. Yuan, “Mining actionlet ensemble
for action recognition with depth cameras,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2012, pp. 1290–1297.
[41] R. Vemulapalli, F. Arrate, and R. Chellappa, “Human action rec-
ognition by representing 3D skeletons as points in a lie group,” in
Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2014, pp. 588–595.
[42] P. Zhang, C. Lan, J. Xing, W. Zeng, J. Xue, and N. Zheng, “View
adaptive recurrent neural networks for high performance human
action recognition from skeleton data,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Comput. Vis., 2017, pp. 2136–2145.
[43] C. Xie, C. Li, B. Zhang, C. Chen, J. Han, and J. Liu, “Memory atten-
tion networks for skeleton-based action recognition,” in Proc. Int.
Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2018, pp. 1639–1645.
[44] N. Zheng, J. Wen, R. Liu, L. Long, J. Dai, and Z. Gong,
“Unsupervised representation learning with long-term dynamics
for skeleton based action recognition,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif.
Intell., 2018, pp. 2644–2651.
[45] J. Liu, A. Shahroudy, D. Xu, and G. Wang, “Spatio-temporal
LSTM with trust gates for 3D human action recognition,” in Proc.
Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2016, pp. 816–833.
[46] W. Zhu et al., “Co-occurrence feature learning for skeleton based
action recognition using regularized deep LSTM networks,” in
Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2016, pp. 3697–3704.
[47] C. Li, P. Wang, S. Wang, Y. Hou, and W. Li, “Skeleton-based
action recognition using LSTM and CNN,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Multimedia Expo Workshops, 2017, pp. 585–590.
[48] Q. Ke, M. Bennamoun, S. An, F. Sohel, and F. Boussaı¨d, “A new
representation of skeleton sequences for 3D action recognition,” in
Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2017, pp. 4570–4579.
[49] T. S. Kim and A. Reiter, “Interpretable 3 D human action analysis
with temporal convolutional networks,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Com-
put. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2017, pp. 1623–1631.
[50] C. Li, Z. Cui, W. Zheng, C. Xu, and J. Yang, “Spatio-temporal
graph convolution for skeleton based action recognition,” in Proc.
AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2018, pp. 3482–3489.
[51] M. Li, S. Chen, X. Chen, Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, and Q. Tian,
“Actional-structural graph convolutional networks for skeleton-
based action recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit., 2019, pp. 3590–3598.
[52] C. Si, W. Chen, W. Wang, L. Wang, and T. Tan, “An attention
enhanced graph convolutional LSTM network for skeleton-based
action recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit., 2019, pp. 1227–1236.
WANG ET AL.: LEARNING MULTI-VIEW INTERACTIONAL SKELETON GRAPH FOR ACTION RECOGNITION
6953
Authorized licensed use limited to: Zhejiang University. Downloaded on May 15,2026 at 07:50:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.


[53] L. Shi, Y. Zhang, J. Cheng, and H. Lu, “Skeleton-based action rec-
ognition with directed graph neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE
Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2019, pp. 7904–7913.
[54] A. G. Howard et al., “MobileNets: Efﬁcient convolutional neural
networks for mobile vision applications,” 2017, arXiv:1704.04861.
[55] F. Chollet, “Xception: Deep learning with depthwise separable
convolutions,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.,
2017, pp. 1800–1807.
[56] M. Wang, B. Ni, and X. Yang, “Recurrent modeling of interaction
context for collective activity recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2017, pp. 7408–7416.
[57] J. Liu, A. Shahroudy, M. Perez, G. Wang, L.-Y. Duan, and
A. C. Kot, “NTU RGB+D 120: A large-scale benchmark for 3D
human activity understanding,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach.
Intell., vol. 42, no. 10, pp. 2684–2701, Oct. 2020.
[58] J. Wang, X. Nie, Y. Xia, Y. Wu, and S.-C. Zhu, “Cross-view action
modeling, learning, and recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2014, pp. 2649–2656.
[59] Y. Du, W. Wang, and L. Wang, “Hierarchical recurrent neural net-
work for skeleton based action recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2015, pp. 1110–1118.
[60] H. Wang and L. Wang, “Modeling temporal dynamics and spatial
conﬁgurations of actions using two-stream recurrent neural
networks,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2017,
pp. 3633–3642.
[61] Q. Ke, M. Bennamoun, S. An, F. Sohel, and F. Boussaı¨d, “Learning
clip representations for skeleton-based 3D action recognition,”
IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 2842–2855, Jun. 2018.
[62] M. Liu and J. Yuan, “Recognizing human actions as the evolution
of pose estimation maps,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit., 2018, pp. 1159–1168.
[63] J.-F. Hu, W.-S. Zheng, J. Lai, and J. Zhang, “Jointly learning het-
erogeneous features for RGB-D activity recognition,” IEEE Trans.
Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 39, no. 11, pp. 2186–2200, Nov. 2017.
[64] I. Lee, D. Kim, S. Kang, and S. Lee, “Ensemble deep learning for
skeleton-based action recognition using temporal sliding LSTM
networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2017, pp. 1012–1020.
Minsi Wang received the BS degree in electrical
engineering from Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai, China, in 2015. He is currently working
toward the PhD degree from Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai, China and is advised by
Prof. Xiaokang Yang. His research interests
include vision and deep learning.
Bingbing Ni received the BEng degree in elec-
trical engineering from Shanghai Jiao Tong Uni-
versity, Shanghai, China, in 2005, and the PhD
degree from the National University of Singapore,
Singapore, in 2011. He is currently a professor at
the Department of Electrical Engineering, Shang-
hai Jiao Tong University. Before that, he was a
research scientist with the Advanced Digital Sci-
ences Center, Singapore. He was with Microsoft
Research Asia, Beijing, China, as a research
intern in 2009. He was also a software engineer
intern with Google Inc., Mountain View, California, in 2010. He was a
recipient of the Best Paper Award from PCM’11 and the Best Student
Paper Award from PREMIA’08. He was also the recipient of the ﬁrst prize
in the International Contest on Human Activity Recognition and Localiza-
tion in conjunction with the International Conference on Pattern Recogni-
tion in 2012.
Xiaokang Yang (Fellow, IEEE) received the BS
degree from Xiamen University, Xiamen, China,
in 1994, the MS degree from the Chinese Acad-
emy of Sciences, Shanghai, China, in 1997, and
the PhD degree from Shanghai Jiao Tong Univer-
sity, Shanghai, China, in 2000. He is currently a
distinguished professor at the School of Elec-
tronic Information and Electrical Engineering,
and the deputy director of the Institute of Image
Communication
and
Information
Processing,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University. He has authored
more than 200 refereed papers, and holds 40 patents. His current
research interests include visual signal processing and communication,
media analysis and retrieval, and pattern recognition. He is an associate
editor of the IEEE Transactions on Multimedia and a senior associate
editor of the IEEE Signal Processing Letters.
" For more information on this or any other computing topic,
please visit our Digital Library at www.computer.org/csdl.
6954
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 45, NO. 6, JUNE 2023
Authorized licensed use limited to: Zhejiang University. Downloaded on May 15,2026 at 07:50:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.
