Title: Re-emergence of orientation coding in primate IT cortex and deep networks reveals functional hubs for visual processing

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2025.10.23.684240v2.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 46

Markdown Content:
1

Re-emergence of orientation coding in primate IT cortex and deep networks reveals functional hubs for visual processing 

Behnam Karami 1,2,3,4 , Tarana Nigam 1,2,5 , Sandrin S. Plewe 1,2 , Caspar M. Schwiedrzik 1,2,5* 

1) Perception and Plasticity Group, German Primate Center – Leibniz Institute for Primate Research, Kellnerweg 4, 37077, Göttingen, Germany 2) Neural Circuits and Cognition Lab, European Neuroscience Institute Göttingen – A Joint Initiative of the University Medical Center Göttingen and the Max Planck Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences, Grisebachstraße 5, 37077, Göttingen, Germany 3) Donders Centre for Cognitive Neuroimaging, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition, and Behaviour, Radboud University, Nijmegen, Netherlands 4) Unit on Neurons, Circuits and Behavior, Laboratory of Neuropsychology, National Institute of Mental Health, and Graduate Partnerships Program, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA 5) Cognitive Neurobiology, Research Center “One Health” Ruhr, University Alliance Ruhr, Faculty of Biology and Biotechnology, Ruhr-University Bochum, Universitätsstraße 150, 44801 Bochum, Germany *To whom correspondence should be addressed: caspar.schwiedrzik@ruhr-uni-bochum.de 

Abstract 

The primate visual system is a hierarchical network of brain areas that transform retinal inputs into rich percepts. According to efficient neural coding principles, basic visual features such as orientation, which are already represented in early visual areas, should not be redundantly encoded in higher areas like V4 and inferotemporal (IT) cortex. We tested this hypothesis by quantifying orientation representation throughout the entire visual stream using functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) and multivoxel pattern analysis (MVPA) in macaque monkeys watching full-field gratings. Contrary to predictions from efficient coding, we found robust orientation information along the entire visual ventral stream from V1 to IT cortex. Orientation information was distributed in cortical and representational space, especially in IT. Voxels with multivariate responsiveness to faces, objects, and bodies carried more orientation information than highly category-selective voxels. They also displayed stronger connectivity within IT and with upstream areas V1–V4. These finding suggests the existence of functional “hubs” that integrate low- and high-level features through enhanced connectivity. This phenomenon generalized to deep convolutional neural network models with high brain similarity, underscoring the importance of hub-like units in hierarchical processing of complex inputs. Together, our results show that orientation re-emerges in IT cortex not through redundancy but as a computational byproduct of functional diversity and connectivity, propounding the existence of “hub” neurons that may support flexible, integrative visual processing beyond object recognition. 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684240 doi: bioRxiv preprint

2

Keywords 

Ventral stream, orientation, functional magnetic resonance imaging, macaque monkey, category selectivity, connectivity, convolutional neural network 

Introduction 

The primate visual system is a complex network of brain areas that operates on retinal inputs to generate rich percepts across multiple stages of processing. In cortex, this computation is thought to begin with the extraction and representation of low-level visual features, such as orientation, color, luminance, contrast, etc., in V1. Processing then proceeds to mid-level features like curvature and depth in areas V3 and V4, and finally culminates in high-level category representations, such as faces, bodies, and objects in inferotemporal (IT) cortex (Felleman & Van Essen, 1991; Kravitz et al., 2013). This hierarchical framework has garnered significant support in systems neuroscience, particularly with the advent of Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (DCNNs) (Barlow, 1961; Burnston & Haueis, 2021). Efficient neural coding suggests that low-level features should not be redundantly represented in higher-level visual areas of the visual processing hierarchy (Barlow, 1961; Burnston & Haueis, 2021). Instead, such features are thought to be dropped from higher stages of processing as representations become increasingly complex and invariant (Riesenhuber & Poggio, 1999; Ullman, 2007). However, other theories suggest that information from lower levels is not discarded but instead preserved across sequential transformations in the visual processing hierarchy, allowing for data-efficient reuse for future inference (Higgins et al., 2022). Indeed, empirical evidence suggests that certain low-level features—such as color, luminance, and contrast—are represented in high-level visual regions like V4 and IT, alongside their encoding in lower-level areas (Ai et al., 2025; Lafer-Sousa & Conway, 2013; M.-L. Liu et al., 2024; Y. Liu et al., 2020; Marquardt et al., 2018; Namima et al., 2014; Taylor & Xu, 2022; Vladusich et al., 2006). This redundancy may be important to enable, e.g., rapid and generalizable plasticity when dealing with highly variable environments (Ahissar & Hochstein, 2004; Manenti et al., 2023). Whether redundancy reduction or a distributed form of coding for low level features, respectively, constitute a fundamental principle of visual processing remains an open and highly debated question (Bracci et al., 2017; Reddy & Kanwisher, 2006). In this study, we investigate whether distributed encoding extends to the feature of orientation, which has not yet been systematically explored in this context. Orientation is a fundamental visual attribute and a key building block for the reconstruction of object shape. Beginning with Hubel and Wiesel's pioneering work on the cat's visual cortex, where they first identified neurons responsive to oriented bars (Hubel & Wiesel, 1962), a lot has been revealed about the organization and structure of orientation representations in early visual areas, most prominently pin-wheel columns in V1 and thick-and-thin stripes in V2 (Dow, 2002; Felleman et al., 2015). However, much less is known about how orientation is represented in higher-level visual areas, particularly beyond V4 (Desimone et al., 1985; Vanduffel et al., 2002). This may be due to the challenges of recording from the entire visual cortex, difficulties 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684240 doi: bioRxiv preprint

3

in eliciting responses to simple stimuli such as gratings in early recordings of IT cortex (Gross, 2008), and/or the strong influence of the traditional hierarchical processing model. We sought to systematically investigate orientation representations across the entire visual ventral stream using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) in awake macaque monkeys to draw a direct link with well-established electrophysiological and neuroimaging findings on orientation processing available in this species. Given the coverage and spatial resolution that fMRI affords, this technique is ideally suited for capturing local as much as distributed representations in the brain. We find that orientation representations extend over the entire visual ventral stream, but in a distinct, distributed form that differs from other visual features. In particular, the spatial arrangement of orientation representations across the hierarchy exhibits an hourglass-shaped organization, where small clusters in early visual areas (V1-V2) converge into larger clusters in mid-level areas (V3-V4), before diverging again into numerous smaller clusters in IT. Orientation representations, especially in areas beyond V4, thus fundamentally differ from the highly localized, patchy representation of color and visual object categories (Bao et al., 2020; Lafer-Sousa & Conway, 2013; Tsao et al., 2006). To further explore the potential role of orientation representations in high-level areas, we examined their relationship with a well-established function of IT cortex—visual object category representation. Interestingly, we find that voxels showing low category selectivity for faces, objects, and bodies carry more orientation information than those responding preferentially to a single category. This finding replicates not only in the brain, but also across multiple DCNN architectures. Furthermore, the orientation-responsive, non-category selective voxels display enhanced functional connectivity with other voxels within IT and with upstream visual areas compared to strongly category selective voxels, suggesting a privileged role in distributing information in a category-agnostic way. In light of these results, we propose that orientation representations in IT cortex may arise from enhanced connectivity with early visual areas, the primary source of orientation information in cortex. Furthermore, we suggest the existence of “hubs” in IT cortex — clusters that receive upstream input with privilege, process visual information non-selectively, and distribute this information to more specialized neural clusters. 

Results 

Presence of orientation information along the ventral stream 

Orientation is represented in a mesoscale, columnar manner across early visual cortex below the resolution of fMRI at 3T. However, multivoxel pattern analysis (MVPA) enables decoding of orientation information by analyzing spatial patterns across multiple voxels (Harrison & Tong, 2009; Haynes, 2015; Kamitani & Tong, 2005). Leveraging this technique, we computed orientation information across the entire visual ventral stream and several control regions in the macaque brain. To that end, we acquired blood oxygenation level-dependent (BOLD) signals at 3T in two male adult monkeys (monkey R, and P) while they fixated on full-field 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684240 doi: bioRxiv preprint

4

Gabor gratings showing one of two orthogonal orientations at a time (45° or 135°; Fig. 1A). We decoded orientation from each brain area using Support Vector Machines (SVM) trained on BOLD activity patterns of the entire region (Fig. 1B). Decoding accuracy was significantly above chance in all areas along the ventral stream in both animals (with the exception of V3): in monkey R, mean decoding accuracy (100 cross-validation folds, one-sided permutation tests, FDR-corrected) was 66.1% (± SD 6.6%, p < 0.0001) in V1, 60.0% (± SD 6.8%, p = 0.0180) in V2, 57.5% (± SD 6.7%, p = 0.0604) in V3, 59.4% (± SD 6.9%, p = 0.0288) in V4, 63.8% (± SD 6.1%, p < 0.0001) in TEO, and 59.9% (± SD 6.6%, p = 0.0180) in TE. In monkey P, mean decoding accuracy was 66.5% (± SD 5.4%, p < 0.0001) in V1, 67.5% (± SD 5.4%, p < 0.0001) in V2, 63.2% (± SD 5.4%, p < 0.0001) in V3, 67.3% (± SD 4.8%, p < 0.0001) in V4, 57.2% (± SD 5.1%, p = 0.0135) in TEO, and 59.4% (± SD 5.3%, p = 0.0018) in TE. These results replicate the well-known involvement of early visual cortex in orientation processing and extend this function well into the anterior temporal lobe. 

Fig. 1. Experimental paradigm and multivoxel pattern analysis (MVPA) results. A. fMRI data were acquired from two macaque monkeys during passive fixation. Each monkey underwent retinotopic mapping (polar angle and eccentricity) to define visual regions of interest (ROIs), followed by orientation mapping using two diagonal grating orientations to assess orientation sensitivity across the entire cortex. B. Orientation information quantified via MVPA across ROIs. A linear support vector machine (SVM) classifier was trained to distinguish the two diagonal orientations based on multivoxel patterns. Error bars represent standard deviation across 100 cross-validation splits. Decoding accuracy was tested against a null distribution generated by shuffling orientation labels (1,000 permutations). Statistical significance values for each region for both monkeys are as follows: Monkey R (V1: p=0.0089, V2: p=0.0284 , V3: p=0.0708, V4: p=0.0161, TEO: p=0.0084, TE: p=0.0247, MT: p=0.3032, LIP: p=0.0942, lPFC: 

p=0.3937; early: p=0.0041, mid: p=0.0218, late: p=0.0036), Monkey P (V1: p=0.0093, V2: p=0.0210 , V3: p=0.0151, V4: p=0.0063, TEO: p=0.0370, TE: p=0.0175, MT: p=0.4417, LIP: p=0.4523, lPFC: p=0.3319; early: p=0.0075, mid: p=0.0091, late: p=0.0036). Asterisks indicate significance: * denotes p<0.05, ** denotes p<0.01. n.s. denotes non-significant. The image of the MRI in A is reproduced with permission from Adobe. C. Orientation-responsive voxels defined based on contrast t-statistics ( p < 0.05) and projected onto inflated surface maps for both monkeys as indicated in yellow. Visual ROI boundaries are outlined with dashed lines. 

To verify the specificity and reliability of these effects, we measured orientation decoding in higher-order and dorsal stream areas (MT, LIP, and lateral prefrontal cortex (lPFC)) using the same procedure. Decoding accuracy was not significantly above chance in any of these areas in any of the animals: in monkey R, mean decoding accuracy was 46.8% (± SD 6.1%, p = 0.8010) in MT, 56.6% (± SD 6.7%, p = 0.6040) in LIP, and 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684240 doi: bioRxiv preprint

5

53.6% (± SD 6.2%, p = 0.2036) in lPFC. In monkey P, values were 52.5% (± SD 4.8%, p = 0.2173) in MT, 52.0% (± SD 5.2%, p = 0.2430) in LIP, and 52.6% (± SD 4.4%, p = 0.2273) in lPFC. This supports the specificity of the decoding results in ventral visual cortex. 

Representational spaces for orientation along the ventral stream 

As we found that orientation information is present throughout the entire visual ventral stream, from V1 to IT (see Fig. 1C for cortical surface projections), we next sought to investigate whether regions differed in their representational format. We hypothesize that V1, as the earliest cortical stage involved in orientation processing and containing numerous highly orientation-selective neurons, would encode information within a select subset of highly informative voxels. These voxels are defined by their strong univariate orientation contrast between the two diagonal orientations, reflecting a more selective and precise representational format. Of note, such univariate effects on the single voxel level can even be observed in human fMRI at much coarser resolution than the one we employed here (Albers et al., 2018). In contrast, higher-order areas in later stages may not rely on a specialized subset of highly tuned neurons. Instead, they may encode orientation information across a broader population of less selective neurons. In this case, orientation information would be more distributed, rather than concentrated, across both highly and less informative voxels, consistent with a global representation format. To investigate the distribution of orientation information in representational space within and across areas, we employed a decoding approach relating the number of voxels required for accurate decoding to single voxel orientation informativeness (schematic in Fig. 2A bottom): in each area, we ranked voxels by their univariate orientation information (quantified by absolute contrast t-statistics, see Methods for details). We trained the SVM classifier with the 10 most informative voxels and incrementally added voxels in descending order of informativeness. This process produced orientation information curves as a function of voxel proportion (i.e., the ratio of selected voxels to the total area size) for each visual area (Fig. 2B). To enable comparison between areas, we normalized each curve by dividing each point by the maximum decoding accuracy per area. To quantify the distribution of information within each area, we identified two characteristic points in the information curve: the first point was based on univariate absolute contrast t-statistic values, representing the proportion of voxels within each area at which decoding information became statistically significant (p < 0.05). The second point corresponded to the proportion of voxels in an area at the peak of the orientation information curve. We then measured the distance between the first and second point, i.e., the voxel proportion at the level of significant information and the voxel proportion at peak information (indicated by empty and filled triangles respectively in Fig. 2B). A greater distance indicates a more distributed orientation information profile within the area. If all orientation information was contained in a select subset of highly selective voxels, orientation information curves would peak at the voxel proportion corresponding to when decoding becomes statistically significant, and the remaining voxels would not contribute relevant information. However, a deviation of the peak from this level implies that additional, less-selective voxels are indeed contributing to 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684240 doi: bioRxiv preprint

6

the total information available in a given area. This would suggest a more distributed orientation representation rather than concentration in a few highly selective voxels. Our analysis revealed that orientation encoding is more localized in early visual areas (V1 and V2) and becomes increasingly distributed in higher-order areas (Fig. 2B). By comparing these distances across areas relative to their sizes (Pearson correlation, monkey R: r = 0.0131, p = 0.9833, n = 5; monkey P: r = -0.0164, p = 0.9791, n = 5), we confirm that this trend is not merely a consequence of the smaller representational spaces in higher-order regions (Fig. 2C). Together, these results suggest that orientation information is organized in a progressively distributed manner across the visual ventral stream. 

Fig. 2. Orientation organization along the visual hierarchy. A. Orientation organization was appraised in two domains: anatomical (cortical volume) and representational (multivoxel pattern) space. In cortical space, voxels with significant orientation selectivity ( p < 0.05 , based on contrast t-statistics) were clustered in 3D by spatial adjacency. In representational space, voxels were incrementally added in descending order of information content (absolute t-statistic), regardless of anatomical location. B. Orientation decoding accuracy curves produced by incremental step-wise approach (see Methods for details) are plotted against proportion of voxels being added to the representational space. Decoding accuracy curves are rescaled to fit between 0.5 and 1 for comparability. Dashed vertical lines with open triangles represent the proportion of significant voxels; filled triangles mark the proportion needed to surpass the threshold (defined as information peak in the representational space). Horizontal lines represent the distance between the two metrics. C. Comparison of information distribution distance (black, thick line) and inverse area size (gray, thin line) across ROIs, normalized to their maximum values from V1 to IT. D. Cluster count and normalized cluster size across three processing stages — early, mid, and late — based on the spatial clustering analysis in cortical space. Cluster size was normalized by dividing by the total volume (mm³) of the respective stage. E. Left two panels: comparisons of cluster size and count in the late stage against size-matched randomly sampled distributions from early and mid stages. Right two panels: comparisons between mid and early stages. Statistical procedures are detailed in Methods. F. Schematic depiction of an hourglass-shaped organization: orientation representations are spatially integrated in cortical space from early to mid stages, then redistributed more diffusely in the late stage. 

Spatial organization of orientation information along the ventral stream 

Along the visual hierarchy, neurons become increasingly specialized in representing complex objects and exhibit greater spatially clustering in cortical space. For example, millimeter-scale color-selective globs in V4 arise from the finer-scale blob/interblob organization in V1 and V2 (Conway et al., 2007; Roe & Ts’o, 1999; 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684240 doi: bioRxiv preprint

7

Tanigawa et al., 2010); and domain-specific patches selective for faces, bodies, objects, and color emerge in IT cortex, consistent with mesoscale organization of primate visual system (Bao et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2025; Lafer-Sousa & Conway, 2013; Y. Lu et al., 2018; Tsao et al., 2006; Wang et al., 2024; Zhu et al., 2025). Organizing feature-selective neurons into specialized clusters is thought to facilitate local computations (Douglas & Martin, 2004), improve downstream readout (DiCarlo et al., 2012), enhance the reliability and robustness of neural code (Op de Beeck et al., 2008), and provide focal targets for experience-dependent plasticity and top-down modulations within these specialized clusters (Bichot et al., 2015; Sigala & Logothetis, 2002). Visual inspection of differential orientation responses projected onto the cortical surface suggests heterogeneous clustering across the visual cortex, with clusters appearing larger in certain regions, such as area V4 (Fig. 1C). To quantitatively examine this observation, we applied a clustering algorithm in volume space, grouping adjacent orientation-informative voxels into clusters (see Methods for details on the algorithm). We quantified the number and relative size of the clusters (i.e., absolute cluster size divided by the region size) across three processing stages: early (V1-V2), mid (V3-V4), and late (TEO-TE/IT). As expected from convergent integration along the visual hierarchy, the mid stage exhibited fewer but larger clusters compared to the early stage (Fig. 2D). In monkey R, the early stage contained 32 clusters, with a relative size (defined as cluster size divided by region size) of 0.0032, whereas the mid stage had 13 clusters with a relative size of 0.0071. Similarly, in monkey P, the early stage had 23 clusters (relative size = 0.0051), and the mid stage had 10 clusters (relative size = 0.0109). This trend did not persist from mid to late stages: in the late stage, clusters became more numerous and smaller, with values similar to the early stage. Specifically, in monkey R, the late stage showed 18 clusters (relative size = 0.0060) compared to 13 clusters (relative size = 0.0071) in the mid stage; in monkey P, the late stage had 13 clusters (relative size = 0.0081) compared to 10 clusters (relative size = 0.0109) in the mid stage. One potential confounding factor that could influence these findings is the relative difference in size between visual processing stages. To account for this, we randomly sampled patches from the early and mid stages to match the size of patches in the late stage, then quantified cluster number and size over 100 iterations of this random sampling procedure. Results revealed that cluster number in the late stage was significantly higher than in the mid stage but not different from the early stage in both monkeys (Fig. 2E left panel). Meanwhile, the average cluster size in the late stage was smaller than in the mid stage, approaching the average cluster size in the early stage. Further comparisons between the early and mid stages, using the same random sampling procedure, indicated that clusters in the mid stage were significantly fewer in number and larger in size than those in the early stage (Fig. 2E right panel). Together, these results reveal a unique and hitherto unexplored property of orientation organization along the ventral stream: orientation clusters initially aggregate from early to mid stages, then diverge again from mid to late stages. This implies that orientation follows the larger meso-scale clustering organization up to mid-level processing stages V3 and V4. However, beyond these stages, in IT, the organization again 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684240 doi: bioRxiv preprint

8

becomes more dispersed rather than concentrated. Overall, the spatial organization of orientation information across stages of processing seems to form an hourglass shape (Fig. 2F). In the following sections we further explore the potential computational implications of this clustering pattern. 

The link between orientation clusters along the hierarchy 

So far, we have identified the orientation processing network across the entire visual ventral stream, characterized its distribution in representational space, and examined its clustering organization in cortical space. Next, we ask how the components of this network work together to represent and transform orientation. For this purpose, we explore (1) how the constituent parts of this network are connected, and (2) how information is transformed between these parts. In order to address the first point, we turned to functional connectivity analysis: we measured Pearson correlation coefficients between pairs of voxels across the three processing stages: early, mid, and late. Since our primary interest was in connectivity, rather than stimulus-driven coactivation, we focused on baseline periods during which no stimulus was presented but the monkey fixated on a blank screen. To ascertain that samples included in this analysis were not influenced by residual stimulus-related activity, we allowed for 10s of response delay by excluding the initial 10s following stimulus presentation offset (note that results were robust to the precise choice of the length of the delay; see Methods for details). To relate connectivity to orientation preference, we defined four possible conditions differing in the feature-specificity of connectivity between area pairs: (1) connectivity between top informative voxels (as defined by the absolute t-statistic for the contrast of the two orientations) in upstream and downstream areas (top2top), (2) connectivity between all voxels in the upstream region and the top informative voxels in the downstream region (downtop), (3) connectivity between top informative voxels in the upstream region and all voxels in the downstream region (uptop), and (4) connectivity between all voxels across upstream and downstream regions (Fig. 3A). Then we focused on connectivity trends across these conditions (from top2top to all). This analysis revealed the strongest connectivity in the top2top condition (all p < 0.0001 for three early-mid, early-late, mid-late comparison conditions in both monkeys, permutation test), with a gradual decrease in connectivity strength across downtop, uptop, and whole-region connections (Fig. 3B). This finding suggests (1) the existence of a strong anatomical and/or functional route that links orientation processing subnetworks across the hierarchy, and (2) overall specificity of connectivity strength between highly informative voxels, as evidenced by consistently stronger connectivity in the top-to-top condition compared to up-to-top or down-to-top conditions. One potential concern is that our functional connectivity measure, based on correlation values, might be biased by the response dynamic range of individual voxels. Voxels with higher variance or signal amplitude may appear more strongly connected, regardless of whether they carry functionally meaningful orientation information. To test whether this potential bias could explain the observed connectivity pattern, we performed a control analysis using brain regions not involved in orientation processing (MT, LIP, lPFC). If higher 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684240 doi: bioRxiv preprint

9

connectivity among top informative voxels were simply due to elevated response dynamics, we would expect a similar pattern in these control areas. Specifically, we compared the connectivity of voxels classified as “significant” (p < 0.05) versus “non-significant” (p > 0.05) based on orientation information across all visual-to-control region pairs, matching sample sizes through 1,000 permutations. We found that functional connectivity between most visual-to-control area pairs was not statistically significant, whereas visual-visual area pairs showed significant connectivity in nearly all cases (Supplementary Fig. 1). These results alleviate concerns about bias in our connectivity measure and further support the observation of strong functional connectivity between voxels representing orientation information. Overall, these findings demonstrate robust connectivity between clusters representing orientation across the entire ventral processing hierarchy. This connectivity may establish a subnetwork of brain areas that collectively participate in orientation processing. Notably, these 

Fig. 3. Connectivity and information transfer across the orientation processing network. A. Top voxels were defined in each region based on significant orientation-selective contrast t-statistics ( p < 0.05 ). Four connectivity types were computed across upstream– downstream region pairs: (1) between top voxels in both regions ( top2top ), (2) between all upstream voxels and top downstream voxels ( downtop ), (3) between top upstream voxels and all downstream voxels ( uptop ), and (4) between all voxels ( all ). B. Mean functional connectivity (z-transformed Pearson correlation) is plotted for each connectivity type across region pairs. Error bars indicate the 99.9% confidence interval. C. To assess representational transfer, top voxels in upstream regions were mapped one-to-one to their strongest connected voxels in downstream regions ( top-connected voxels; see Methods). A linear SVM classifier was trained on multivoxel patterns from upstream top voxels and tested on the corresponding downstream top-connected voxels. 

D. Decoding accuracy is shown for all upstream–downstream pairs. Thick black bars indicate observed transfer accuracies, and light gray bars represent null distributions generated by random size-matched voxel sampling for statistical comparison. The dashed black line marks chance level (0.5). Asterisks indicate statistical significance: *** denotes p < 0.001 , ** denotes p < 0.01 , * denotes p < 0.05 ; and n.s. denotes not-significant. The V1–V2 transfer, which was the only pair that proved significant in both monkeys, is highlighted with a red rectangle. 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684240 doi: bioRxiv preprint

10 

connections were observed even during blank screen periods, with no active orientation input, suggesting that long-lasting plasticity mechanisms may have shaped the orientation-processing network across the hierarchy over time. 

Transformation of orientation information between stages of processing 

So far, we have determined orientation-representing clusters along the visual hierarchy as well as the functional connectivity between them. Next, we investigated how information is routed and transformed through those connections. To this end, we grouped visual areas into upstream-downstream pairs. For each pair, we selected a subset of the most orientation informative voxels (defined by absolute univariate contrast t-stats) in the upstream area and identified the corresponding voxels with the strongest connectivity to those in the downstream area. We then trained an SVM classifier in the upstream top informative representation space with a linear kernel and tested its prediction on the corresponding most connected downstream voxels (schematic in Fig. 3C). This allowed us to quantify the extent of shared information between connected upstream and downstream representational spaces. This analysis was conducted across all 15 possible area pairs. To generate a baseline distribution for statistical comparisons, we repeated this procedure using randomly selected, size-matched group of voxels in each downstream area instead of the most strongly connected voxels. As shown in Fig. 3D, among all pairs tested, only the V1-V2 pair consistently demonstrated above-chance information transfer across both monkeys (decoding transfer = 68.3% in Monkey R and 62.5% in Monkey P; p < 0.0001 for both, FDR-corrected for multiple comparisons). Other area pairs either failed to reach statistical significance or showed inconsistent results between the two monkeys. To further validate these findings, we repeated the analysis using voxels with near-zero and top negative connectivity values (see Methods for details). The V1-V2 observed generalization effect did not replicate in these conditions, lending further support to the robustness of the observed V1-V2 information transfer (see Supplementary Fig. 2 for details). This analysis provides evidence of a direct information transfer from V1 to V2, supporting the existence of communication subspace between these areas. In contrast, we did not observe similar communication between other area pairs. This could indicate either a more complex, non-linear transformation of orientation information across these areas (or a limitation in the precision of the BOLD signal for detecting potential transformations at the microscale). 

Relationship between orientation and object category representation in IT cortex 

We showed that orientation, as a low-level visual feature, is represented not only in early visual areas but also high-level areas such as IT. This is unexpected according to efficient coding principles: as orientation is already encoded highly precisely in V1, propagation of this information to high-level areas is potentially redundant and hence computationally inefficient. IT cortex, as the apex of visual processing hierarchy, is cardinally involved in representing high-level object categories. If this is the case, then what neural 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684240 doi: bioRxiv preprint

11 

mechanism underlie re-representation of orientation alongside complex object information in IT? And does this re-representation confer any computational benefit to the primary function of IT, i.e., object representation? To address these questions, we acquired data using a standard face-object-body (FOB) localizer, presenting blocks of faces, bodies, man-made objects, fruits/vegetables, and phase-scrambled noise in pseudorandom order (Fisher & Freiwald, 2015) (Fig. 4A top panel; see Methods for details). This allowed us to localize face-, body-, and object-preferring regions, respectively, in high-level visual cortex, by contrasting the object categories (Supplementary Fig. 3). Subsequently, we tested whether orientation information is associated with encoding of either of these object categories. To that end, we employed a GLM to predict each voxel’s orientation information (absolute contrast t-stat) in V4, TEO, and TE with its object information (quantified by contrast test comparing object of interest vs. all other object categories) in any of the three categories separately. No significant predictive relationship was found (Supplementary Table 1), suggesting no straightforward link between orientation information and any specific high-level object category in our data. To further explore the relationship between orientation and high-level object representations, we projected each voxel’s average BOLD response into a 3D representational space defined by face, body, and object dimensions (Fig. 4A bottom panel). We then clustered voxels into four categories: pure (responding to only one category), double (responding to two categories), mix (responding to all three categories), and non-responsive (low response across all categories, used as a control; see Methods for clustering details). Having identified these clusters based on their high-level object response patterns, we compared orientation information across these clusters to determine whether high-level object response patterns relate to orientation encoding. If orientation was linked to object response patterns, two possible scenarios could emerge: either (1) voxels with high selectivity in any category might prefer one orientation due to their object selectivity and/or sparse response properties; e.g., face selective voxels might prefer horizontal orientations while object selective ones preferring vertical/diagonal orientations, or (2) voxels with mixed (multi-variate) responses might represent more orientation information, given their broader responsiveness to diverse features, including orientation. To appraise these scenarios, we compared the absolute orientation response magnitude—quantified as the absolute contrast t-statistic and referred to here as orientation information —across the four identified cluster categories. As shown in Fig. 4C, there was no significant effect of cluster category in V4. Values are reported as mean (standard deviation). For Monkey R, orientation information was 1.2358 (SD 1.0050) in non-responsive, 1.5180 (SD 1.0301) in pure, 1.0012 (SD 0.9615) in double, and 1.2439 (SD 0.8271) in mix-responsive clusters; for Monkey P, values were 1.1825 (SD 0.9465), 1.3764 (SD 0.9364), 1.4103 (SD 0.7665), and 1.1914 (SD 0.6830) in the respective categories (all pairwise comparisons, p > 0.1, FDR-corrected). 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684240 doi: bioRxiv preprint

12 

Fig. 4. Face–Object–Body (FOB) responsive clusters and their relationship to orientation information. A. Top : schematic of Face Localizer stimuli and paradigm. Bottom : Voxels were classified in FOB space based on their response profile to these three categories. Of particular interest, Pure clusters responded to only one category; Mix clusters responded to all three categories (faces, bodies, objects). B. Pure and Mix clusters projected onto inflated cortical surfaces in both monkeys. Pure clusters appeared more spatially dispersed across IT, while Mix clusters were more localized in posterior IT (TEO and posterior TE). The dashed line marks the TEO–TE boundary. C. Violin plots showing the distribution of orientation information (quantified as the absolute value of the orientation contrast t-statistic) across the four voxel types defined in A. Black horizontal lines indicate medians; shaded regions denote standard deviations. One-way ANOVA was used to assess differences across groups and the results appeared on the plots; pairwise comparisons were conducted and only significant results are shown. *** denotes p < 0.001 , ** denotes p < 0.01 , * denotes p < 0.05 .

In IT, however, we found a significant cluster effect: the mix cluster contained higher orientation information than the other clusters. In Monkey R, orientation information was 0.9153 (SD 0.7207) in non-responsive, 0.9492 (SD 0.6836) in pure, 0.7823 (SD 0.5973) in double, and 1.3889 (SD 0.9826) in mix-responsive clusters. In Monkey P, values were 1.0752 (SD 0.8140), 1.0782 (SD 0.9684), 0.9352 (SD 0.6971), and 1.7941 (SD 0.9103), respectively. For both monkeys, orientation information in mix-responsive clusters was significantly higher than in non-responsive (monkey R: p = 0.0130, monkey P: p = 0.0060), pure (monkey R: p = 0.0160, monkey P: p = 0.0040), and double (monkey R: p = 0.0130, monkey P: p = 0.0040) clusters (all p-values FDR-corrected). No other pairwise comparisons reached statistical significance (all p > 0.1). These results support the second scenario whereby multi-variate, mix-responsive voxels exhibit stronger orientation representations. This finding raises a critical question: orientation selectivity or mix-responsiveness, which causes the other? To put more clearly, are these mix-responsive neurons inherently orientation selective, or do they become so because they respond to images containing more coherent, diagonal edge patterns, which is more likely to happen across broader object sets (i.e., a set comprising faces, bodies, objects, etc.) rather than any individual object category? To investigate this, we quantitatively analyzed the orientation content of the images in the different categories in the localizer at both local and global scales (see Methods for details). 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684240 doi: bioRxiv preprint

13 

Statistical comparisons revealed no significant orientation differences between object categories at either level, and no category contained diagonal orientations more than others in our stimulus set (see Supplementary Fig. 4). This analysis rules out the first scenario, i.e., orientation selectivity being the primary driver of the object cluster effect. This leaves us with a critical question: Why are multi-variate, mix-responsive voxels more orientation selective? One possibility is that these voxels function as "hub" in IT cortex, ideally positioned to receive input from earlier processing areas which are strongly tuned for low-level features, and subsequently distribute information throughout IT (Fig. 5A). If this is case, one would expect these hub voxels to exhibit stronger connectivity to upstream visual areas as well as other voxels within IT. To test this hypothesis, we turned again to connectivity analysis, similar to the one we used to explore connectivity between orientation clusters across the ventral stream. Consistent with our prediction, we found that mix IT clusters were more strongly connected to other voxels within IT than were pure or non-responsive clusters (Fig. 5B). Connectivity values are reported as the mean of z-transformed Pearson correlation coefficients. In Monkey R, mean connectivity (± 99.9% confidence interval) was 0.0098 (0.0006) for non-responsive, 0.0211 (0.0008) for pure, and 0.0409 (0.0013) for mix clusters. In Monkey P, values were 0.0127 (0.0014) for non-responsive, 0.0142 (0.0009) for pure, and 0.0212 (0.0018) for mix clusters. Moreover, compared to others, mix clusters demonstrated stronger connectivity to upstream visual areas, from V1 through V4 (Fig. 5C). Finally, to test whether these stronger connections to mixed-responsive voxels convey orientation information more effectively than those connecting to pure voxels, we measured and compared the difference in connectivity between highly informative voxels (p < 0.05, defined by contrast) and sample size-matched non-informative voxels (p > 0.05) across two cluster categories: pure and mixed (Fig. 5D). We observed that highly orientation-informative voxels exhibited stronger connectivity to mixed clusters compared to pure 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684240 doi: bioRxiv preprint

14 

clusters in almost 

Fig. 5. Connectivity differences among pure and mix IT clusters and the hub network hypothesis. A. Schematic of hub network hypothesis . Hub voxels are characterized by two properties (1) a mixed category response profile — i.e., responsiveness to multiple object classes — and (2) enhanced functional connectivity both within the same region and to upstream visual areas. B. 

Within-IT connectivity comparison between mix, pure, and non-responsive voxels. Points represent average functional connectivity (z-transformed Pearson correlation) to all other IT voxels. Error bars indicate the 99.9% confidence interval. C. Connectivity from IT clusters to upstream visual areas (V1–V4), using the same metrics and plotting conventions as in B. D. Differential connectivity to orientation-informative upstream voxels. For each cluster, we computed the difference between connectivity to significant vs. non-significant voxels ( p < 0.05 , contrast test). Line plots show the average difference across 1000 permutations, with shaded areas representing the full distribution. Red lines and shading correspond to mix clusters; blue to pure clusters. In all cases — except V2 in Monkey R — mix clusters exhibited stronger differential connectivity to significant voxels. All mix vs. pure comparisons were significant (permutation test, p < 10 -4 ). 

all downstream visual areas. In Monkey R, the average difference in connectivity (±99% confidence interval) for V1 was 0.0012 (2.82 × 10 ⁻⁵) for pure and 0.0020 (4.33 × 10 ⁻⁵) for mix clusters; for V2, 0.0008 (2.86 × 10 ⁻⁵) for pure and 0.0003 (4.78 × 10 ⁻⁵) for mix; for V3, 0.0015 (4.81 × 10 ⁻⁵) for pure and 0.0016 (7.47 × 10 ⁻⁵) for mix; and for V4, 0.0012 (6.09 × 10 ⁻⁵) for pure and 0.0020 (9.71 × 10 ⁻⁵) for mix clusters. In Monkey P, the corresponding values were: V1, 0.0030 (4.50 × 10 ⁻⁵) for pure and 0.0040 (6.63 × 10 ⁻⁵) for mix; V2, 0.0024 (3.90 × 10 ⁻⁵) for pure and 0.0034 (5.80 × 10 ⁻⁵) for mix; V3, 0.0020 (6.89 × 10 ⁻⁵) for pure and 0.0040 (1.10 × 10 ⁻⁴) for mix; and V4, 0.0012 (4.54 × 10 ⁻⁵) for pure and 0.0023 (7.20 × 10 ⁻⁵) for mix clusters. These results indicate that, across both monkeys and most visual areas, connections to mix-responsive clusters are more strongly associated with orientation-informative voxels than those to pure clusters, and thus reveals a potential source of orientation information in IT. Collectively, these findings suggest the existence of “hubs”, identified by stronger connectivity, in IT, which is commonly considered the apex of the visual ventral stream. These hubs may receive first-hand input from upstream processors, provide high-level generalized object information, and may distribute this information to other clusters throughout IT for further processing. 

Deep convolutional neural networks (DCNNs) exhibit IT-like orientation-object relationship 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684240 doi: bioRxiv preprint

15 

So far, we have demonstrated the existence of orientation representations in IT and shown how these are linked to heightened connectivity and multivariate response properties, together forming a functional hub at the culmination of the visual processing stream. We next asked whether deep convolutional neural networks (DCNNs)—which share a hierarchical, feedforward architecture with the primate visual system—exhibit a comparable property. DCNNs trained on core object recognition tasks have been particularly successful in reproducing both primate object recognition behavior and neural response patterns (Cadieu et al., 2014; Yamins et al., 2014). Among the many architectures introduced in recent years, some display stronger brain-like characteristics, as quantified by the Brain-Score metric (Schrimpf et al., 2020), which evaluates model–brain similarity across behavioral and neural benchmarks. We leveraged this metric to directly compare the biological primate visual system with its artificial counterparts. We ranked the models in descending order of Brain-Score (see Table 1 in (Schrimpf et al., 2020)) and selected those with scores exceeding 0.5, indicating moderate to strong alignment with neural and behavioral data from primate visual system (i.e., explaining over 50% of the variance). We then imported the pretrained version of these models (trained on the ImageNet dataset) and extracted their penultimate layer responses to the same face–body–object image set used in the fMRI face localizer (see Methods), along with their responses to the two diagonal grating stimuli. We focused on the penultimate layer to enable a direct comparison to monkey IT cortex, as both considered the final stage of visual processing in artificial and biological networks (Cadieu et al., 2014). Using the same clustering procedure that we had applied to the fMRI responses, we identified Pure, Double, and Mix clusters based on their object category response profile, and computed orientation information as the absolute difference in unit responses to the two diagonal gratings. We then averaged these values across models to obtain a distribution of model-wise orientation information for each cluster type (Fig. 6B). Orientation information values are reported as mean (standard deviation), with 99% confidence intervals. The average orientation information was 0.1400 (0.1700) for pure clusters, 0.1600 (0.1800) for double clusters, and 0.1800 (0.1900) for mix clusters. 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684240 doi: bioRxiv preprint

16 

Fig. 6. Brain-like DCNNs exhibit similar orientation response patterns across Pure and Mix clusters. A. Images of faces, bodies, objects, and two diagonal gratings were input to a set of deep convolutional neural networks (DCNNs) selected based on high Brain-Score values (> 0.5). A clustering approach analogous to that used for IT voxels was applied to the penultimate layer of each model to define Pure , Double , and Mix unit clusters based on category selectivity. Orientation information was computed as the absolute difference in unit responses to the two grating orientations. B. Orientation information across the three cluster types for each model. Thin colored lines and circles represent individual DCNN trends; the thick dark-gray line indicates the average trend across all models. Solid, slightly enlarged red, green, and blue circles mark the mean orientation information across models for Mix, Double, and Pure clusters, respectively. Only the Pure vs. Mix comparison reached statistical significance ( p < 0.01 denoted by **). DN: DenseNet; RN: ResNet. C. Influence of upstream layers (V1-, V2-, and V4-like) on Pure, Double, and Mix clusters in the penultimate layer of each DCNN. For each architecture, gradient-based sensitivity analyses were used to quantify how much activations in upstream layers contributed to unit responses in the three cluster types (see Methods). Thin gray lines represent results from individual models, and the thick black line shows the average across models with error bars indicating standard error of the mean. Across all three upstream layers, a consistent ascending trend was observed from Pure to Double to Mix clusters, indicating that Mix clusters receive the strongest upstream influence. This pattern parallels the gradient of upstream connectivity found for IT hub voxels in the fMRI data (see Fig. 5C). * denotes p < .05 .

Pairwise comparisons across clusters revealed that orientation information was significantly higher in mix compared to pure clusters (mix vs. pure: p = 0.0042), while the differences between mix and double clusters (p = 0.0759) and between pure and double clusters (p = 0.0759) did not reach significance (sign-rank test, FDR-corrected). These findings replicate the effect observed in IT cortex across both monkeys. It bolsters the observed link between orientation representation and object category response profile at the final processing stage and shows that this relationship extends to brain-like artificial networks. Finally, to test whether a functional hub resembling IT hub voxels also emerges in the penultimate layer of DCNNs, we quantified the influence of upstream layers (V1-, V2-, and V4-like) on pure, double, and mix units for each architecture independently (see Methods). This analysis revealed an overall ascending trend in upstream influence from pure to mix units across all candidate layers (Fig. 6C). Notably, this pattern closely mirrors the gradient of upstream connectivity observed for IT hub voxels in the fMRI data (Fig. 5C). Together, these findings point to a shared organizational principle between the primate visual system and DCNNs: both converge on forming a hub in the final stage of processing that integrates and transforms information from earlier layers. This parallel suggests that orientation-linked hubs may constitute a general computational strategy for supporting flexible object representations. 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684240 doi: bioRxiv preprint

17 

Discussion 

In this study, we systematically explored the network processing orientation information across the entire macaque visual ventral stream hierarchy. Our results demonstrate that orientation information is decodable, with varying accuracies, from multi-voxel pattern responses across areas, ranging from early (V1, V2) to late stages (IT) of processing. Spatially, orientation information was organized in an intriguing hourglass shape across the visual hierarchy: distributed representations in V1 and V2 converged into dense clusters in V3 and V4, while becoming again more spatially distributed in IT. In contrast, in representational space, we found a steadily increasing distribution of information along the visual hierarchy. This was evidenced by a growing distance between univariate significance levels and information peak levels in the information curves (Fig. 2B). Orientation-responsive voxels at the highest stages of processing in IT did not show selectivity for complex objects, a property shared with orientation-responsive units in top layers of DCNNs. Orientation-responsive voxels were also strongly interconnected within IT as well as to orientation-responsive voxels in earlier areas. Taken together, this suggests that orientation information is redundantly encoded across the ventral stream but may be used for different computational roles, requiring different representational formats and spatial organization, at different stages of processing. 

Organization of orientation information along the ventral stream 

The hourglass-shaped pattern of spatial clustering that we found along the ventral stream is unique for (at least) two reasons: (1) it deviates from the typical convergence logic of the ventral stream (from early to late stages) (Y. Liu et al., 2020; Vanduffel et al., 2002), and (2) it contrasts with other low-level features like color (Lafer-Sousa & Conway, 2013) or high-level features like faces, bodies, and objects (Moeller et al., 2008; Pinsk et al., 2009; Tsao et al., 2006; Zhu et al., 2025), which exhibit a clustered and patch-like organization at the highest stages of processing (Supplementary Fig. 3). Interestingly, accounts of the structure of the ventral stream based on graph-theory (rather than on the laminar pattern of connectivity) allocate V4, where we observed the largest degree of spatial clustering for orientation, to the top of the hierarchy, whereas V1 and anterior IT rank on a similar, lower level, thus mirroring the hourglass shape we observed (Sporns, 2016; Sporns et al., 2007). Spatial clustering in the ventral stream is thought to arise from distance-dependent constraints on neural computation (Blauch et al., 2022; Z. Lu et al., 2025; Margalit et al., 2024) and may be critical, e.g., for local computations such as sharpening within stimulus domains (Sompolinsky & Shapley, 1997). How and why such computations would differ between areas for the same feature may depend on the specific tasks to which the respective areas contribute (Ahissar & Hochstein, 2004; Fang et al., 2022; Manenti et al., 2023). The increasingly distributed nature of orientation information from V1 to IT in representational space further suggests that readout strategies may differ across the ventral stream: in early stages, orientation representation is more focused on a select subset of high-informative voxels, consistent with selective 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684240 doi: bioRxiv preprint

18 

readout (Nadler & DeAngelis, 2005; Purushothaman & Bradley, 2005). As processing progresses, orientation representations become less dependent on these highly informative voxels and increasingly distributed across less informative voxels in later stages, consistent with a more global readout model (Shadlen et al., 1996). 

Orientation transformation along the visual ventral stream 

After identifying the organization of orientation clusters across the visual hierarchy, we investigated how these clusters are interconnected and how orientation information transforms between them. Significantly informative orientation voxels exhibited stronger connectivity with one another compared to non-informative voxels. This selectively enhanced connectivity was evident during the baseline periods, in which no stimulus was presented, suggesting that it reflects (polysynaptic) pathways within and between brain areas forming an orientation processing subnetwork in the ventral stream. This resembles what has been reported on the basis of anatomical connections for other visual features such as color: For example, color-biased blobs in V1 are specifically and reciprocally connected with color-biased thin stripes in area V2 (Federer et al., 2021; Livingstone & Hubel, 1984). Within this network, our findings reveal a direct linear interaction for orientation information between areas V1 and V2. This aligns with an electrophysiological study that identified a communication subspace linking subsets of V1 and V2 neurons in anesthetized macaques viewing oriented gratings (Semedo et al., 2019). Among all other visual area pairs we analyzed, we did not observe similar effects, suggesting privileged communication between V1 and V2. This may arise from the particularly strong structural feedforward and feedback connectivity between V1 and V2 that exceeds that of other areas (H. Li et al., 2024). Additionally or alternatively, the absence of a linear interaction between the other area pairs could be indicative of more complex non-linear transformations between these regions (and/or a limitations of fMRI in capturing fine-grained circuit dynamics). 

Orientation information in IT cortex 

The ventral visual stream has long been considered an epitome of a hierarchical processing system, wherein simple visual features (e.g. orientation, color, spatial frequency) are extracted early, and progressively integrated into more complex representations downstream (Kravitz et al., 2013; Pollen et al., 1971). In this framework, simple features are not redundantly represented in higher visual areas like IT. However, lesions of higher visual areas such as V4 (Weerd et al., 1996) and even TE (Dean, 1978) can induce deficits in orientation discrimination, and a small number of neurophysiological studies reported responses of IT neurons to oriented gratings or bars (Gross et al., 1972; Maunsell et al., 1991; Orban & Vogels, 1998; Pollen et al., 1971; Vogels & Orban, 1993). Such effects have previously been attributed to task-demands: e.g., long time constants of neural activity in higher-level cortex are thought to support temporally successive orientation 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684240 doi: bioRxiv preprint

19 

discrimination (Orban & Vogels, 1998; Vogels et al., 1997). Yet, our task did not require discrimination nor did it pose any memory demands. An alternative hypothesis states that responses to oriented stimuli in high-level cortex arise as a byproduct of responses to complex objects. This hypothesis is supported by a number of recent fMRI studies investigating the dependence of high-level feature representations on low-level attributes in humans (Fan et al., 2021; Henderson et al., 2023; Nasr & Tootell, 2012; Rice et al., 2014) and non-human primates (Bao et al., 2020; Kumar et al., 2019; Yao et al., 2023). They find that orientation content of images can predict, to varying degrees, each voxel’s BOLD response to those images. For example, face- and body-selective areas show a bias toward diagonal orientations, while scene-selective areas favor vertical and horizontal orientations. Another possibility is that orientation itself is not explicitly represented in IT but emerges as an epiphenomenon of high-level visual features or object category representations, which are inherently rich in orientation content (Henderson et al., 2023). However, all above-mentioned neuroimaging studies measured IT’s orientation response indirectly by analyzing the orientation content of complex objects, often using Gabor filters. This approach has two critical limitations (i) complex images typically contain abundant orientations, making it difficult to isolate responses to specific ones, and (ii) IT responses to such images may result from non-linear interactions between orientations, which linear separation methods cannot fully capture. Given these concerns, we adopted a more direct measurement of orientation responses using classical sine-wave grating stimuli. If orientation representation in IT is merely a byproduct of complex object processing, it should vanish when simple gratings are presented. However, we found that approximately 13% of IT voxels exhibited significant orientation responses. This makes it unlikely that IT’s orientation response is purely a byproduct of object processing (Supplementary Fig. 3). While we cannot entirely rule out the hypotheses of task-specificity or complex object dependence for orientation representations in IT, we put forward and evaluate an alternative hypothesis, which we elaborate on in the following sections. 

Orientation information in IT cortex: The Hub Hypothesis 

To delve deeper into the repeated representation of orientation along the ventral stream, we explored the relationship between orientation and complex objects. Interestingly, we found that voxels responding to multiple object categories—referred to here as mixed responsive voxels—were more diagnostic to orientation than strongly category-selective voxels (Fig. 5C). That voxels responsive to objects do not overlap with voxels responding to the constituent features bears some resemblance to the observation that V4 clusters tuned to curves and corners do not overlap with clusters tuned for orientation (Jiang et al., 2021). Mixed responsive voxels in our data were primarily located in IT, distributed along cortex rather than clustered, and tended to localize more posteriorly, near or within TEO. Moreover, these mixed responsive voxels exhibited stronger connectivity both within IT, and with upstream areas (V1, V2, V3, and V4). This led us to identify a hyper-connected IT subspace characterized by diverse response profile encompassing both orientation and multiple object categories. We refer to these voxels as 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684240 doi: bioRxiv preprint

20 

“hubs”. Due to their high connectivity and mixed responsiveness, these hubs could play a critical role in various functions: (1) By virtue of their mixed responsivity (Johnston et al., 2020; Johnston & Freedman, 2023; Rigotti et al., 2013), hubs could make decision making (Johnston et al., 2020; Kira et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2021) and learning processes (Barak et al., 2013; Karami & Schwiedrzik, 2024) more flexible. Indeed, higher-order areas such as IT cortex have been suggested to be more plastic than lower areas (Ahissar & Hochstein, 2004). (2) Given the relative lack of specialization and strong connectivity with other IT and upstream neurons, hubs are ideally positioned to be modulated by downstream regions to flexibly render the information required for a task at hand (W. Li, 2016; Zylberberg, 2018). This capacity makes them conducive to contribute to adaptive behavior and one-shot learning (Donoghue et al., 2023; Kondat et al., 2024; Lee et al., 2015; Ramirez-Cardenas et al., 2016; Sorscher et al., 2022). (3) Because of their strong upstream connectivity, hubs in IT could take privileged roles in processes requiring improved readout from earlier areas, such as directing attention. Indeed, recent studies indicate that area TEO, where we found most hubs, may play a key role in attentional deployment, not only for complex objects but also for low-level features (Stemmann & Freiwald, 2019). 

Hub units also emerge in Deep convolutional neural networks (DCNNs) 

Deep convolutional neural networks (DCNNs) have been remarkably successful in explaining a plethora of phenomena in primate vision, from object recognition to the neural response pattern similarities. In the present study, we reveal an unexplored property of the primate visual system: the emergence of a functional hub in the final processing stage, characterized by multivariate responsiveness and enhanced connectivity to upstream regions. Motivated by the success of DCNNs as models of visual processing, we asked whether a similar hub-like property emerges in their architecture, particularly the ones with higher brain similarities. Indeed, we found that DCNNs also encode orientation information in their final layer, where it is linked to multivariate responsiveness. Furthermore, units carrying orientation information exhibit stronger connectivity to upstream layers. These properties parallel those observed in hub voxels of macaque IT cortex. Interestingly, four architectures (CorNet-S, ResNet-50, ResNet-101, and Inception-v4) showed a decrease in upstream influence, opposite to the pattern we observed in fMRI and the other network models. This inversion is consistent with a distinct architectural motif shared exclusively by these four models: additive residual refinement . In such designs, each layer computes a residual update relative to its predecessor, effectively subtracting predictable variance and driving successive representations toward orthogonal subspaces. By construction, such residual-driven orthogonalization removes low-level feature information from higher layers, leading to stage-specific rather than integrated representations. In contrast, the fMRI data indicate that low-level feature orientation is retained across stages of processing, consistent with more overlapping, concatenative architectures. Thus, these four models deviate from ventral stream processing despite their high Brain Scores. 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684240 doi: bioRxiv preprint

21 

Taken together, our findings support the view that orientation selectivity in IT is not a redundant recapitulation of early visual processing, but rather an emergent property of many hierarchical systems that confers computational advantages by concentrating feature integration in a hub at the final processing stage. 

Limitations 

In this study, we employed full-field sine-wave gratings at a single spatial frequency of 2 cpd. This choice was motivated by the fact that 2 cpd falls near the median preferred spatial frequency of macaque V1 neurons (Bredfeldt & Ringach, 2002; De Valois et al., 1982) and within the range of peak perceptual sensitivity for natural images (Bex & Makous, 2002), making it well suited for capturing orientation responsiveness across the entire visual cortex. However, we acknowledge that spatial frequency tuning exists throughout the visual hierarchy (M.-L. Liu et al., 2024; Toosi et al., 2025), and therefore our protocol may have missed voxels with narrowband sensitivity to substantially lower or higher spatial frequencies. Additionally, the use of full-field gratings may not have optimally driven neurons with strong surround suppression or end-stopping, potentially leaving such populations undetected by our present protocol. Finally, we used conventional BOLD imaging without a contrast agent such as Magnetic Iron Oxide Nanoparticles (MION). While contrast-enhanced imaging can improve sensitivity and spatial specificity in macaque fMRI, our BOLD protocol was sufficient to reliably recapitulate well-known polar angle and eccentricity maps across early visual cortex as well as face patches in IT cortex (Supplementary Figs. 3 and 5), confirming that it captures the functional organization relevant to the present study. 

Conclusion 

In conclusion, our findings suggest that low-level representations in high-level areas like IT emerge as a result of network connectivity and may serve novel computational roles beyond IT’s core function of object processing. This phenomenon likely represents an adaptive feature of the visual ventral stream, enabling additional functions such as learning, flexibility, and attention, rather than being a byproduct of high-level visual processing itself. Our fMRI and DCNN data suggest the existence of “Hub” neurons in macaque IT, characterized by mixed selectivity to diverse object categories as well as low-level features. Future research should focus on confirming the existence of these neurons in IT and further exploring their computational roles. This includes their potential contributions to high-level visual processing and higher-order cognitive functions such as learning, memory, decision-making, attention, and adaptive behavior in general. 

Acknowledgements 

We would like to thank Wim Vanduffel and Arjen Alink for input on the project; Igor Kagan for support; Ronja Mielsch, Daniela Lazzarini, Leonore Burchardt, and Sina Plümer for help with animal training and care; and Tamara Becker, Olga Batura, and Annette Schrod for veterinary care. This project has received funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (Grant agreement No. 802482) and from the German Research Foundation’s Emmy Noether Program (SCHW1683/2-1). This work used the Scientific Compute Cluster at GWDG, the joint data center of 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684240 doi: bioRxiv preprint

22 

Max Planck Society for the Advancement of Science (MPG) and University of Göttingen. This research was supported in part by the Intramural Research Program of the National Institutes of Health (NIH). The contributions of the NIH author(s) are considered Works of the United States Government. The findings and conclusions presented in this paper are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the NIH or the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 

Disclaimer 

The content of this work is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the European Union, or the European Research Council. Neither the European Union nor the granting authority can be held responsible for them. 

Author contributions 

B.K., Conceptualization, Methodology, Investigation, Formal Analysis, Visualization, Data curation, Writing – original draft preparation; T.N., Methodology, Investigation, Data curation; S.S.P., Methodology, Investigation, Data curation; C.M.S., Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing – original draft preparation, Supervision, Project administration, Funding acquisition. 

Materials and methods Subjects and procedures 

We acquired functional MRI data from two adult male macaque monkeys ( Macaca mulatta; monkey R, 10-11 kg, 8 yrs, and monkey P, 6-7 kg, 7 yrs). No power calculation was performed, but sample size was chosen to be in accordance with previous studies (Moeller et al., 2008; Nigam & Schwiedrzik, 2024). The animals were housed in pairs or social groups at the German Primate Center (DPZ) in accordance with German and European regulations. The facility provided a stimulating environment for the animals, including various toys and structures, natural and artificial lighting, and access to outdoor spaces, surpassing the space requirements outlined in European regulations. All procedures were approved by the responsible regional government authority (Niedersächsisches Landesamt für Verbraucherschutz und Lebensmittelsicherheit -LAVES). Both animals underwent surgery under general anesthesia and sterile conditions to implant an MRI-compatible cranial head-post (PEEK) embedded in bone cement (Palacos, Heraeus Kulzer GmbH), anchored by MR-compatible ceramic screws (Rogue Research) (Dominguez-Vargas et al., 2017). Prior to the main fMRI data acquisition phase, both monkeys completed substantial training for horizontal chair acclimation and passive fixation tasks using positive reinforcement. Head position was stabilized throughout training and 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684240 doi: bioRxiv preprint

23 

data acquisition using the implanted head-posts, allowing for cleaning of the implants, accurate recording of gaze/pupil diameter, and minimizing motion artifacts during MRI experiments. This fMRI study was conducted in non-human primates for several reasons, including: (1) the extensive existing knowledge of primate visual system enables direct comparison with well-established electrophysiological and neuroimaging findings, in particular concerning orientation representations in early visual areas and object/category representations in higher visual areas; (2) using trained, head-stabilized non-human primates permits prolonged, high-resolution data acquisition; and (3) any observed effect can lay the foundation for immediate testing of hypothesized underlying mechanism using electrophysiological and causal techniques - approaches uniquely feasible in non-human primate models (Milham et al., 2022). 

MRI data acquisition 

We used a 3T scanner (MAGNETOM-Prisma, Siemens Healthineers, Erlangen, Germany) at the DPZ to collect both anatomical and functional MRI data. Data acquisition protocols followed community guidelines (Autio et al., 2021). High-resolution anatomical MRI data were acquired using a T1-weighted magnetization-prepared rapid gradient echo (MPRAGE) sequence (field of view [FOV] 128 mm, voxel size = 0.5 × 0.5 × 0.5 mm, repetition time [TR] = 2.7 s, echo time [TE] = 2.96 ms, inversion time [TI] = 850 ms, bandwidth [BW] = 220 Hz/Px, flip angle [FA] = 8 degrees, 240 slices, 11 cm loop coil, Siemens Healthineers). The monkeys were anesthetized during these scans using isoflurane (1.5%–2%) and were positioned in an MR-compatible stereotactic frame (Kopf Instruments). We acquired functional images in awake animals using 8-channel phased-array receive surface coils with a horizontally oriented single loop transmit coil (H. Kolster, Windmiller Kolster Scientific). During these scans, monkeys were seated in sphinx position inside an MR-compatible horizontal chair (Valette et al., 2006). Each functional time series consisted of whole-brain gradient-echo planar images (EPI; FOV = 96 mm, voxel size = 1.2 × 1.2 × 1.2 mm, TR = 2 s, TE = 27 ms, BW = 1302 Hz/Px, echo spacing [ESP] = 0.93 ms, FA = 76 degrees, 43 slices) acquired in interleaved order with two times generalized autocalibrating partially parallel acquisitions (GRAPPA) acceleration. 

Stimuli and task 

The paradigm — including stimulus presentation and reward delivery — was programmed and conducted using Psychtoolbox (Brainard & Vision, 1997) running in MATLAB (The Mathworks). Visual stimuli were rear-projected onto a screen positioned 85 cm in front of the monkey inside the scanner, using a video projector (Epson EB-G5600, refresh rate 60 Hz, resolution 1024 × 768 px). Eye position was tracked using a video-based eye tracker (SR Research Eyelink 1000 NHP Long Range Optics) sampling at 1000 Hz. In all experiments, monkeys were rewarded with fluid for maintaining fixation within a 2° diameter central fixation window for 3.7 ± 0.2 seconds. This fixation duration was chosen to minimize temporal overlap between reward delivery and image acquisitions (TRs). Only runs with fixation performance ≥ 85% were later included in the analyses. 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684240 doi: bioRxiv preprint

24 

Orientation mapping 

We employed an fMRI block design to map orientation-selective responses across the entire macaque cortex. To this end, full-field oriented gratings (full contrast; spatial frequency = 2 cyles per degree) were presented to robustly activate all visually responsive regions across the entire visual field. A central red fixation point (0.5° diameter) was continuously displayed throughout each block to guide fixation. Parameters followed previous studies (Alink et al., 2013; Henriksson et al., 2008; Tong & Pratte, 2012; Vanduffel et al., 2002). In Monkey R, six orientations (0°, 45°, 67.5°,90°,112.5°,135°) were each presented for 32 seconds, interleaved by 24 seconds of blank black background. Even though six orientation angles were presented to this monkey, only the two diagonal angle conditions (45° and 135°) were included in analysis for the present study. In Monkey P, only the two diagonal gratings (45° and 135°) were presented, each for 26 seconds, interleaved with 26 seconds of blank black background. Each orientation condition was repeated seven times. Gratings flickered at 6 Hz to maximize the evoked BOLD response, and their phase was randomized across four values (0, π/4, π/2, 3π/4) to optimally stimulate both simple and complex cells in early visual cortex. In total, 60 runs in Monkey R and 15 runs in Monkey P met the inclusion criteria of ≥85% fixation stability to be included in analysis. Over all usable runs, each diagonal grating was presented 60 times in Monkey R and 104 times in Monkey P. 

Polar angle and eccentricity mapping 

For polar angle and eccentricity mapping, we followed established procedures (Kolster et al., 2014) To obtain polar angle maps, we presented visual stimuli consisting of a wedge with an arc length of 30°, rotating either clockwise or anticlockwise against a black background with a red central fixation point of 0.5° diameter. The arc moved at the speed of 6.3/s. The wedge contained full-contrast black-and-white checkerboard patterns composed of 18 concentric circles each containing 40 radial black–white segment pairs. To enhance the evoked response, the black and white elements alternated at a flicker rate of 2.5 Hz. Each run included 5 full rotation cycles in Monkey R, and 8 cycles in Monkey P (57.1428 seconds per cycle), followed by 12 seconds of black background presentation at the end. For eccentricity mapping, expanding or contracting black-and-white checkerboard pattern rings were presented around a 0.5° red central fixation point. A total of 18 rings were used to map the visual field from 0.4° to 16.5° of eccentricity. Each ring was composed of three concentric circles, except for the two most peripheral rings, which contained two and one circle(s), respectively. Each circle contained 24 angular black– white segment pairs and spanned approximately 0.92 ° of visual field in eccentricity. During each presentation cycle, rings were presented sequentially sweeping linearly across the visual field— each for 2 seconds in Monkey R (36 s total) and 3.1746 seconds in Monkey P (57.1428 s total). Each run 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684240 doi: bioRxiv preprint

25 

consisted of 8 cycles in Monkey R, and 12 cycles in Monkey P, followed by a 12-second blank, black background. In total, we acquired 27 polar angle and 17 eccentricity mapping runs for Monkey R, and 14 polar angle and 24 eccentricity runs for Monkey P. 

Face-Object Body localizer 

We used a standard face–object–body (FOB) localizer protocol as described in (Fisher & Freiwald, 2015; Nigam & Schwiedrzik, 2024; Schwiedrzik et al., 2015). Monkeys fixated on a central red fixation dot (0.5° diameter) while viewing grayscale images from the following categories: monkey faces, body parts/headless bodies, man-made objects, fruits, and phase-scrambled images. Each image was presented for 0.4 seconds, and each category block lasted 36 seconds, followed by a 24-second presentation of a blank gray background. In total, 60 runs in Monkey R, and 51 runs in Monkey P passed the inclusion criteria and were used in the analyses. Data from Monkey P were also used in another publication (Nigam & Schwiedrzik, 2024). 

Analyses 

General preprocessing 

Anatomical images were intensity normalized, skull-stripped, and segmented using Freesurfer (v5.3, https://surfer.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu/) (Fischl, 2012). To create inflated cortical surface reconstructions, the gray–white matter boundary in the skullstripped anatomical scans was reconstructed, smoothed, and inflated separately for each hemisphere (Dale et al., 1999; Fischl et al., 1999). Preprocessing of functional data was performed with custom scripts using Freesurfer’s functional analysis stream, FS FAST (Fischl, 2012), AFNI (https://afni.nimh.nih.gov/) (Cox, 1996), and the JIP toolkit (https://www.nitrc.org/projects/jip/). We performed slice-wise motion-correction in each run using AFNI’s 3dAllineate with terms for cubic warping in the phase encoding direction, shifts, rotations, scaling, and skewing. This process was followed by slice-time correction using FS FAST. Geometric distortions of the functional volumes were corrected by mutual information-based non-linear alignment to the high-resolution anatomical scans as implemented in JIP. 

Visual Region of Interest (ROI) definition 

We employed Fourier analysis to obtain spatial selectivity of voxels from polar angle and eccentricity mapping sessions (Arcaro & Livingstone, 2017; Bandettini et al., 1993; Engel et al., 1997). We determined the phase and amplitude of the periodic signal that matched stimulus frequency using Fourier transform of the mean time series accounting for a 4-second hemodynamic lag. The resulting phase angle data were registered and projected onto individualized inflated cortical surfaces for both monkeys (Supplementary Fig. 5). 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684240 doi: bioRxiv preprint

26 

We followed established procedures to define visual regions (Arcaro et al., 2011; Brewer et al., 2002; Janssens et al., 2014; Van Essen et al., 2001). Boundaries were delineated based on color-coded phase maps where clearly identifiable. In cases where boundaries could not be reliably defined—particularly in higher-order visual areas and associated control regions (MT, LIP, and lateral prefrontal cortex [lPFC])—we used the D99 atlas (Saleem et al., 2021), individually registered for each monkey, to complete the delineation. 

Univariate analyses 

We used a General Linear Model (GLM) in FS FAST to estimate the contribution of each diagonal orientation to the BOLD signal. Prior to the analysis, we convolved the predictors of interest with the canonical hemodynamic response function (HRF) for the blood-oxygenation level dependent (BOLD) signal (Leite et al., 2002). Nuisance regressors included 3D motion, eye position, and reward delivery. To determine the differential effect of orientation, we contrasted the two diagonal orientations (45° vs. 135°) and obtained t-statistics and corresponding p-values. These were used to identify orientation informative voxels. 

Orientation information across visual hierarchies; MVPA analysis 

To quantify orientation information in each visual area, we measured decoding accuracy in the voxel representation using multivoxel pattern analysis (MVPA) as described in (Harrison & Tong, 2009). We began by regressing out nuisance variables (eye position, 3D motion, and reward). Eye position and reward were convolved with the HRF to match the temporal dynamics of the BOLD signal. Only residuals, which retain the main task-related signal while excluding the impact of external confounds, were used for further analysis. Next, we averaged the residual BOLD time series within each block containing one of the three conditions: blank screen, clockwise grating (45°), or anti-clockwise grating (135°), to obtain the average BOLD activity per condition per run. We discarded the first 4 seconds (2 TRs) of each block to account for the hemodynamic response delay. This yielded a matrix of average BOLD responses for the three conditions across voxels within each region of interest (ROI), forming the basis of multivoxel representational space. On this space, we trained a linear support vector machine (SVM) classifier to discriminate between the two orientation conditions (clockwise vs. anticlockwise), using two-thirds of the repetitions for training and one-third for testing. We repeated this process on randomized train/test splits for 100 repetitions (cross-validation) and computed the mean and standard deviation of decoding accuracy, as presented in Fig. 1B. To establish a baseline for statistical comparison, we shuffled orientation labels and repeated the decoding analysis 1000 times to generate a null distribution. Each observed decoding accuracy per ROI was then tested against this distribution using a permutation test. This analysis was performed over visual ROIs (V1, V2, V3, V4, TEO, and TE), as well as in control regions MT, LIP, and lateral prefrontal cortex (lPFC). To track the progression of orientation information across the visual hierarchy, we also grouped visual ROIs into three processing stages: early (V1, V2), mid (V3, V4), and late (TEO, TE /IT). 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684240 doi: bioRxiv preprint

27 

Orientation organization in cortical volume space 

To quantify how orientation information is spatially organized in the cortical volume, we first identified voxels showing significant orientation sensitivity (p < 0.05), as determined by univariate t-statistics (see section “Univariate analyses” ). After identifying statistically significant voxels, we spatially clustered them using the following criteria: (i) Significant voxels that are immediately adjacent in 3D cortical space were grouped together; (ii) voxels with no immediate neighbor were labeled as isolated and excluded from clusters. We implemented the clustering using a region-growing algorithm. Beginning with the most posterior-medial significant voxel (arbitrarily chosen), we recursively searched its immediate 3D neighborhood for other significant voxels. If a neighboring voxel was found, it was grouped into the same cluster; otherwise, it was labeled as isolated. This process continued until all voxels were either clustered or labeled as isolated. To maintain spatial cohesiveness and reduce branching, we pruned clusters by reclassifying voxels with fewer than two neighbors as isolated. This clustering procedure produced conglomerated clusters of varying sizes and shapes. We performed this analysis independently for each of the three visual stages (early, mid, and late), and quantified the average cluster size and cluster count. To enable comparison across stages, we normalized the cluster size (in mm³) by the total volume of each corresponding visual stage. To control for between-area size differences, we implemented a size-matched random sampling approach. Since the late stage was the smallest, we randomly sampled clusters from early and mid stages to match the late stage in volume, repeating this process 1000 times. We then compared cluster size and count between the late area and the size-matched distributions from early and mid stages using unpaired t-tests (see Fig. 2E). We performed this procedure to compare early vs. mid stages as well. 

Orientation organization in multivoxel representation space 

To quantify how orientation information is distributed within the multivoxel representational space, we devised and implemented a stepwise incremental decoding procedure across visual areas from V1 to IT. We first sorted voxels in descending order based on the absolute value of their orientation contrast t-statistic. Starting with the 10 most informative voxels, we incrementally added voxels one at a time, recalculating decoding accuracy at each step as the dimensionality, and hence participating proportion of each area, increased. This resulted in a decoding accuracy curve as a function of the proportion of voxels participating in classification per brain area. For comparability across regions, we rescaled the curve between 0.5 (minimum) and 1 (maximum decodable information). We then identified the proportion of voxels at which the curve first crossed a 0.85 threshold (i.e. 85% of the maximum decodable information; results were robust across nearby 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684240 doi: bioRxiv preprint

28 

thresholds). This point reflects the proportion of the ROI — ordered by individual informativeness — required to achieve peak multivoxel decoding performance. In parallel, we computed the proportion of significantly informative voxels by dividing the number of voxels with significant individual t-statistics (p < 0.05) by the total number of voxels in the ROI. These two metrics captured information distribution in two aspects: one from multivoxel decoding, the other from single voxel statistics. We defined the information distribution distance as: distance = (proportion at decoding threshold) − (proportion of significant voxels) Larger distances indicate more distributed representations, where collectively informative patterns arise from voxels that might not be individually informative. To rule out an impact of variation in area size as a potential confound, we additionally computed and plotted the inverse area size alongside information distance. The rationale is that a small proportional difference in a large area corresponds to a greater number of voxels — i.e., higher-dimensional representations — which may exert a disproportionately large impact on multivoxel information in representational space. 

Connectivity between orientation-representing voxels 

To measure functional connectivity, we focused on correlated BOLD signal fluctuations during blank background presentation intervals, to minimize stimulus-driven effects such as co-activation. We also excluded the first 10 seconds following stimulus offset to further reduce residual stimulus influence (results were robust when using a 4-second delay instead). We concatenated BOLD time series from the blank baseline condition across runs for each voxel and computed z-transformed Pearson correlation coefficients between all voxel pairs. We grouped the resulting pairwise functional connectivity values into four categories: (i) top2top : between significant voxels in both upstream and downstream areas (ii) downTop : between significant downstream voxels and all upstream voxels (iii) upTop : between significant upstream voxels and all downstream voxels (iv) all : between all voxels across the two regions We performed this procedure across three hierarchical processing stage pairs: early-mid, early-late, and mid-late. We then plotted the average connectivity across the four categories (top2top → downTop → upTop → all) to evaluate whether orientation responsiveness systematically influenced inter-areal functional connectivity. To statistically compare connectivity between these category pairs (e.g., top2top vs. downTop), we applied the following resampling procedure to account for unequal group sizes: for each comparison, we randomly subsampled the larger group to match the size of the smaller group over 10,000 iterations and performed an unpaired t-test the two size-matched groups. We report the proportion of iterations in which the t-test yielded a significant difference (p < 0.05) as a measure of the robustness of the effect. 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684240 doi: bioRxiv preprint

29 

To test robustness of these connectivity findings, we repeated this analysis across all 15 pairwise combinations of individual visual ROIs (e.g., V1-V2, V1-V3, etc.). Similar to the stage-wise analysis, we compared connectivity among significant voxels to a null distribution obtained through size-matched random sampling from non-significant voxels over 1000 permutations using unpaired t-tests. Finally, to determine the specificity of the observed connectivity effects to visual areas, we repeated this procedure for all possible pairwise combinations of visual and control ROIs (e.g., V1-MT, V1-LIP, etc.) and compared the results with exclusively visual pairs obtained above (see Supplementary Fig. 1). 

Information transformation along the visual hierarchy 

To investigate information transfer across the visual hierarchy, we combined connectivity and decoding approaches. For each significant upstream voxel (based on contrast t-statistic, p < 0.05), we identified its most strongly connected downstream voxel. This process was repeated for all significant upstream voxels, with the constraint that each downstream voxel could be assigned to only one upstream voxel. If a downstream voxel had already been assigned, we selected the next strongest unassigned voxel, ensuring one-to-one mapping between upstream and downstream voxels. We named the two corresponding voxels top, and top-connected in upstream and downstream respectively. We performed this assignment across all 15 possible pairs of visual regions along the hierarchy (i.e., V1–V2, V1–V3, V1–V4, V1–TEO, V1–TE, V2–V3, ..., TEO–TE). To quantify how much information was shared between top and top-connected voxels, we trained a linear SVM classifier on the top upstream voxels and tested it on the corresponding top-connected downstream voxels. The higher cross-region decoding accuracy indicated greater similarity in the geometry of the representation space, reflecting stronger information transfer. To test statistical significance of the observed transfer decoding performance, we again turned to random sampling and permutation approach: we randomly selected voxel subsets from upstream and downstream areas (matched in size to the top voxels set), trained an SVM on the upstream sample, and tested it on downstream sample. This random sampling and classification was repeated for 1000 permutations to generate a null distribution. We then statistically tested the observed transfer accuracy against this null distribution using unpaired t-tests for each region pair. This analysis was repeated independently for all 15 visual area pairs (see Fig. 3D). 

Clustering in Face-Object-Body (FOB) space and corresponding orientation information 

As for the analyses of orientation information, we first regressed out nuisance variables from the Face-Object-Body (FOB) localizer data. We then averaged BOLD activity during face, body, and object presentations, respectively. We subtracted the same-run blank background baseline to compute evoked responses. We then z-scored each voxel’s evoked response separately for each category condition, using the mean and 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684240 doi: bioRxiv preprint

30 

standard deviation computed across all voxels within the respective region of interest (e.g., TE, etc.). Voxels with a z-score exceeding a threshold of 1.2 were marked as responsive to the respective category (results were robust across a range of reasonable thresholds; see Supplementary Fig. 6A for details). Voxels were categorized based on their response profiles into one of the following groups: 

 Mix : responsive to all three categories 

 Double : responsive to any two of the three categories 

 Pure : responsive to only one category 

 Non-responsive : bottom 20% of responses across all conditions We performed this classification independently within areas V4, TEO, and TE. V4 was included as a mid-level control region, while TEO and TE were selected for their established roles in high-level object category representation (Kravitz et al., 2013). We then computed orientation information for each voxel in these regions using the absolute contrast t-statistic derived from the orientation mapping data. Orientation information distributions were compared across the defined FOB clusters (non-responsive, pure, double, and mix). Results from TEO and TE were combined to represent area IT and are shown in Fig. 4C. Individual area results are provided in Supplementary Fig. 6B. 

Pure vs. mix clusters’ connectivity within-IT and upstream 

We assessed the functional connectivity of pure and mix voxels using the same z-transformed Pearson correlation approach described earlier (section “ Connectivity between orientation-representing voxels”) . For within-IT analyses, we measured average connectivity between each cluster type — non-responsive, pure, and mix — and all other voxels within IT cortex. For cross-area analyses, we computed the average connectivity between each of the above mentioned cluster types in IT and all voxels in upstream areas (V1– V4) (see Fig. 5B, C). This way, we tried to examine potential differences in both same-level and upstream connectivity between mix and pure clusters. We used an identical permutation-based approach described in the “Connectivity Between Orientation-Representing Voxels” section to draw statistical comparisons across cluster types. 

Next, we tested whether mix and pure voxels in IT differed in their connectivity to significantly orientation-informative voxels in upstream areas. To this end, voxels in each upstream area were divided into significant and non-significant groups based on the orientation contrast t-statistic (p < 0.05). From the non-significant group, we randomly sampled voxels to match the number of significant voxels, and computed the connectivity difference as: connectivity difference = average connectivity to significant voxels – average connectivity to sampled non-significant voxels. 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684240 doi: bioRxiv preprint

31 

We performed this random sampling procedure 1000 times separately for the pure and mix clusters. We then statistically compared the resulting distributions using permutations to evaluate differences in preferential connectivity to informative upstream voxels between mix and pure populations. 

DCNN Models’ response to Face–Object–Body (FOB) categories and orientation 

To test whether the enhanced orientation information observed in mix voxels is replicated in artificial neural networks, we analyzed a class of deep convolutional neural networks (DCNNs) selected based on their similarity to the primate visual system using the Brain-Score metric (Schrimpf et al., 2020). This metric quantifies the similarity of DCNNs to the primate brain across multiple dimensions—including perceptual behavior and representational similarity—and provides an overall score indicating model–brain correspondence. We selected 17 DCNN architectures with a Brain-Score above 0.5 (results were robust to more stringent thresholds; see Fig. 6B for a complete list of models). This process was intended to ensure the inclusion of the most relevant models for comparison with the orientation–cluster effect observed in the monkey’s brain. The DCNNs included in this study were pretrained on the ImageNet dataset, which contains over 1.2 million images across 1000 object categories, and were implemented using the PyTorch framework. To examine whether these models replicate the orientation–category interaction observed in the brain, we applied the same analysis used in fMRI voxel space to the models' penultimate layer, chosen for its correspondence to IT cortex as the final stage of visual representation in the brain. We defined pure, double, and mix units in each model using the same clustering logic as applied to IT voxels — based on their category-specific evoked responses to faces, objects, and bodies. Orientation information for each unit was quantified as the absolute difference in response to the two diagonal grating stimuli. This procedure was performed separately for each model. To test for any systematic differences in orientation information across category clusters, we first averaged each model’s orientation information within each cluster. We then compared these model-averaged values across cluster pairs (mix vs. pure, mix vs. double, double vs. pure) using unpaired t-tests. Finally, to quantify connectivity between either of clusters in penultimate layer, analogous to fMRI connectivity analysis, we turned to upstream influence analysis. upstream influence was defined using a gradient-based sensitivity measure, following approaches in deep network interpretability (Bach et al., 2015; Simonyan et al., 2014; Sundararajan et al., 2017) and receptive-field analysis (Alain & Bengio, 2018; Luo et al., 2016). This measure computes the total leverage of upstream activations on each penultimate unit, consistent with gradient-based definitions of unit importance widely used in machine learning and neuroscience (Cadieu et al., 2014; Yamins & DiCarlo, 2016). Specifically, for each penultimate unit 𝑣 ௗ, we define its upstream influence as: 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684240 doi: bioRxiv preprint

32 

Influence (𝑑; 𝑈) = ෍ ෍ ෍ ቤ ∂𝑣 ௗ

∂𝑈 ௖,௛,௪ 

ቤ

> ௐ௪ୀଵ ு௛ୀଵ ஼௖ୀଵ

Where 𝑈 ௖,௛,௪ is the activation tensor of the upstream layer (channels × height × width), 𝑣 ௗ is the scalar activation of the d-th penultimate unit. This quantity captures the local, linearized sensitivity of penultimate unit 𝑣 ௗ to infinitesimal perturbations anywhere in the upstream feature map 𝑈 ௖,௛,௪ . Taking the absolute value and summing across all channels and spatial locations yields a global, sign-agnostic measure of total upstream influence on that unit. We computed the average upstream influence for penultimate units assigned to pure, double, and mix clusters, separately for each candidate V1-, V2-, and V4-like layer (see Supplementary Table 2 for layer definitions per architecture). To enable comparison across networks, the influence values were z-scored within each architecture across cluster types. Statistical significance of cluster differences was assessed across all 17 models using the Wilcoxon signed-rank test (Fig. 6C). 

Extracting and comparing orientation content of object categories 

To control for potential confounds arising from systematic differences in orientation content across stimulus categories (faces, bodies, and objects), we quantified and compared the orientation content of all visual stimuli using Gabor filters (Adelson & Bergen, 1985; Jones & Palmer, 1987; Kay et al., 2008; Movellan, 2002). The goal was to assess whether low-level image features could account for the observed relationship between IT orientation sensitivity and object selectivity. We defined the 2D Gabor filter as: 

𝑔(𝑥, 𝑦) = exp ൭ − 12 ∗ ቆ (𝑥 ᇱଶ + 𝛾 ଶ ∗ 𝑦 ᇱଶ )𝜎 ଶ ቇ൱ . cos ቆ ቆ2𝜋 ∗ 𝑥 ᇱ

𝜆 ቇ + 𝜓 ቇ 

With rotated coordinates ( 𝑥 ᇱ , 𝑦′ ): 

𝑥 ᇱ = 𝑥 ⋅ sin(θ) + 𝑦 ⋅ cos(θ) , 𝑦 ᇱ = −𝑥 ⋅ cos(θ) + 𝑦 ⋅ sin(θ) 

Where: 

𝜎 is standard deviation of Gaussian envelope, 

θ is orientation of the Gabor filter in radians, 

𝜆 is wavelength of the sinusoidal factor in pixels, 

𝛾 is spatial aspect ratio, and 

𝜓 gives phase offset of the sinusoidal wave. 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684240 doi: bioRxiv preprint

33 

For each image, we constructed two Gabor filter banks: one to capture fine (local) orientation content and another to capture coarse (global) orientation content. This was achieved by modifying the filter parameters. For fine orientation detection, we used 𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒(𝑥, 𝑦) = 100 , 𝛾 = 0.9 and 𝜆 = 5 ; for coarse orientation, we used the full image size, 𝛾 = 0.5 and 𝜆 = 10 for detecting coarse (global) orientation. These values were chosen based on visual inspection of filter responses, and results were robust across a range of reasonable parameter settings. This way, we computed average fine and coarse orientation contents for each images. We then compared the distributions of orientation content across stimulus categories and against the two diagonal grating conditions using circular statistical tests implemented in the Circular Statistics Toolbox (Berens, 2009). Specifically, we applied the Watson–Williams multi-sample test to assess differences in mean orientation content across object categories, and the V-test to evaluate whether object orientations were non-uniformly distributed and biased toward the two diagonal orientations. 

Data and code availability 

The data and analysis code that support the findings of this study are available upon reasonable request from the corresponding author. 

References 

Adelson, E. H., & Bergen, J. R. (1985). Spatiotemporal energy models for the perception of motion. JOSA A, 2(2), 284–299. https://doi.org/10.1364/JOSAA.2.000284 Ahissar, M., & Hochstein, S. (2004). The reverse hierarchy theory of visual perceptual learning. Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 8(10), 457–464. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2004.08.011 Ai, H., Lin, W., Liu, C., Chen, N., & Zhang, P. (2025). Mesoscale functional organization and connectivity of color, disparity, and naturalistic texture in human second visual area. eLife , 13 , RP93171. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.93171 Alain, G., & Bengio, Y. (2018). Understanding intermediate layers using linear classifier probes 

(arXiv:1610.01644). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1610.01644 Albers, A. M., Meindertsma, T., Toni, I., & de Lange, F. P. (2018). Decoupling of BOLD amplitude and pattern classification of orientation-selective activity in human visual cortex. NeuroImage, New Advances in Encoding and Decoding of Brain Signals , 180 , 31–40. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2017.09.046 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684240 doi: bioRxiv preprint

34 

Alink, A., Krugliak, A., Walther, A., & Kriegeskorte, N. (2013). fMRI orientation decoding in V1 does not require global maps or globally coherent orientation stimuli. Frontiers in Psychology , 4.https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00493 Arcaro, M. J., & Livingstone, M. S. (2017). Retinotopic Organization of Scene Areas in Macaque Inferior Temporal Cortex. Journal of Neuroscience , 37 (31), 7373–7389. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0569-17.2017 Arcaro, M. J., Pinsk, M. A., Li, X., & Kastner, S. (2011). Visuotopic Organization of Macaque Posterior Parietal Cortex: A Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging Study. Journal of Neuroscience , 31 (6), 2064–2078. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3334-10.2011 Autio, J. A., Zhu, Q., Li, X., Glasser, M. F., Schwiedrzik, C. M., Fair, D. A., Zimmermann, J., Yacoub, E., Menon, R. S., Van Essen, D. C., Hayashi, T., Russ, B., & Vanduffel, W. (2021). Minimal specifications for non-human primate MRI: Challenges in standardizing and harmonizing data collection. NeuroImage , 236 , 118082. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2021.118082 Bach, S., Binder, A., Montavon, G., Klauschen, F., Müller, K.-R., & Samek, W. (2015). On Pixel-Wise Explanations for Non-Linear Classifier Decisions by Layer-Wise Relevance Propagation. PLOS ONE , 10 (7), e0130140. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0130140 Bandettini, P. A., Jesmanowicz, A., Wong, E. C., & Hyde, J. S. (1993). Processing strategies for time-course data sets in functional mri of the human brain. Magnetic Resonance in Medicine , 30 (2), 161– 173. https://doi.org/10.1002/mrm.1910300204 Bao, P., She, L., McGill, M., & Tsao, D. Y. (2020). A map of object space in primate inferotemporal cortex. 

Nature , 583 (7814), 103–108. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2350-5 Barak, O., Rigotti, M., & Fusi, S. (2013). The sparseness of mixed selectivity neurons controls the generalization-discrimination trade-off. The Journal of Neuroscience: The Official Journal of the Society for Neuroscience , 33 (9), 3844–3856. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2753-12.2013 Barlow, H. B. (1961). Possible principles underlying the transformation of sensory messages. Sensory Communication , 1(01), 217–233. Berens, P. (2009). CircStat: A MATLAB Toolbox for Circular Statistics. Journal of Statistical Software , 31 ,1–21. https://doi.org/10.18637/jss.v031.i10 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684240 doi: bioRxiv preprint

35 

Bex, P. J., & Makous, W. (2002). Spatial frequency, phase, and the contrast of natural images. JOSA A ,

19 (6), 1096–1106. https://doi.org/10.1364/JOSAA.19.001096 Bichot, N. P., Heard, M. T., DeGennaro, E. M., & Desimone, R. (2015). A Source for Feature-Based Attention in the Prefrontal Cortex. Neuron , 88 (4), 832–844. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2015.10.001 Blauch, N. M., Behrmann, M., & Plaut, D. C. (2022). A connectivity-constrained computational account of topographic organization in primate high-level visual cortex. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 119 (3), e2112566119. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2112566119 Bracci, S., Ritchie, J. B., & de Beeck, H. O. (2017). On the partnership between neural representations of object categories and visual features in the ventral visual pathway. Neuropsychologia, Special Issue: Concepts, Actions and Objects: Functional and Neural Perspectives , 105 , 153–164. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2017.06.010 Brainard, D. H., & Vision, S. (1997). The psychophysics toolbox. Spatial Vision , 10 (4), 433–436. Bredfeldt, C. E., & Ringach, D. L. (2002). Dynamics of Spatial Frequency Tuning in Macaque V1. Journal of Neuroscience , 22 (5), 1976–1984. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.22-05-01976.2002 Brewer, A. A., Press, W. A., Logothetis, N. K., & Wandell, B. A. (2002). Visual Areas in Macaque Cortex Measured Using Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging. Journal of Neuroscience , 22 (23), 10416–10426. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.22-23-10416.2002 Burnston, D. C., & Haueis, P. (2021). Evolving Concepts of “Hierarchy” in Systems Neuroscience. In F. Calzavarini & M. Viola (Eds.), Neural Mechanisms: New Challenges in the Philosophy of Neuroscience (pp. 113–141). Springer International Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-54092-0_6 Cadieu, C. F., Hong, H., Yamins, D. L. K., Pinto, N., Ardila, D., Solomon, E. A., Majaj, N. J., & DiCarlo, J. J. (2014). Deep Neural Networks Rival the Representation of Primate IT Cortex for Core Visual Object Recognition. PLoS Computational Biology , 10 (12), e1003963. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003963 Chen, R., Nie, P., Ma, L., & Wang, G.-Z. (2025). Organizational Principles of the Primate Cerebral Cortex at the Single-Cell Level. Advanced Science , 12 (11), 2411041. https://doi.org/10.1002/advs.202411041 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684240 doi: bioRxiv preprint

36 

Conway, B. R., Moeller, S., & Tsao, D. Y. (2007). Specialized Color Modules in Macaque Extrastriate Cortex. Neuron , 56 (3), 560–573. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2007.10.008 Cox, R. W. (1996). AFNI: Software for analysis and visualization of functional magnetic resonance neuroimages. Computers and Biomedical Research , 29 (3), 162–173. https://doi.org/10.1006/cbmr.1996.0014 Dale, A. M., Fischl, B., & Sereno, M. I. (1999). Cortical surface-based analysis. I. Segmentation and surface reconstruction. NeuroImage , 9(2), 179–194. https://doi.org/10.1006/nimg.1998.0395 De Valois, R. L., Albrecht, D. G., & Thorell, L. G. (1982). Spatial frequency selectivity of cells in macaque visual cortex. Vision Research , 22 (5), 545–559. https://doi.org/10.1016/0042-6989(82)90113-4 Dean, P. (1978). Visual cortex ablation and thresholds for successively presented stimuli in rhesus monkeys: I. Orientation. Experimental Brain Research , 32 (4), 445–458. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00239546 Desimone, R., Schein, S. J., Moran, J., & Ungerleider, L. G. (1985). Contour, color and shape analysis beyond the striate cortex. Vision Research, Neural Basis of Visual Perception , 25 (3), 441–452. https://doi.org/10.1016/0042-6989(85)90069-0 DiCarlo, J. J., Zoccolan, D., & Rust, N. C. (2012). How Does the Brain Solve Visual Object Recognition? 

Neuron , 73 (3), 415–434. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2012.01.010 Dominguez-Vargas, A.-U., Schneider, L., Wilke, M., & Kagan, I. (2017). Electrical Microstimulation of the Pulvinar Biases Saccade Choices and Reaction Times in a Time-Dependent Manner. Journal of Neuroscience , 37 (8), 2234–2257. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1984-16.2016 Donoghue, T., Cao, R., Han, C. Z., Holman, C. M., Brandmeir, N. J., Wang, S., & Jacobs, J. (2023). Single neurons in the human medial temporal lobe flexibly shift representations across spatial and memory tasks. Hippocampus , 33 (5), 600–615. https://doi.org/10.1002/hipo.23539 Douglas, R. J., & Martin, K. A. C. (2004). NEURONAL CIRCUITS OF THE NEOCORTEX. Annual Review of Neuroscience , 27 (Volume 27, 2004), 419–451. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.neuro.27.070203.144152 Dow, B. M. (2002). Orientation and Color Columns in Monkey Visual Cortex. Cerebral Cortex , 12 (10), 1005–1015. https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/12.10.1005 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684240 doi: bioRxiv preprint

37 

Engel, S. A., Glover, G. H., & Wandell, B. A. (1997). Retinotopic organization in human visual cortex and the spatial precision of functional MRI. Cerebral Cortex , 7(2), 181–192. https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/7.2.181 Fan, S., Wang, X., Wang, X., Wei, T., & Bi, Y. (2021). Topography of Visual Features in the Human Ventral Visual Pathway. Neuroscience Bulletin , 37 (10), 1454–1468. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12264-021-00734-4 Fang, C., Cai, X., & Lu, H. D. (2022). Orientation anisotropies in macaque visual areas. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 119 (15), e2113407119. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2113407119 Federer, F., Ta’afua, S., Merlin, S., Hassanpour, M. S., & Angelucci, A. (2021). Stream-specific feedback inputs to the primate primary visual cortex. Nature Communications , 12 (1), 228. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-20505-5 Felleman, D. J., Lim, H., Xiao, Y., Wang, Y., Eriksson, A., & Parajuli, A. (2015). The Representation of Orientation in Macaque V2: Four Stripes Not Three. Cerebral Cortex (New York, NY) , 25 (9), 2354– 2369. https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhu033 Felleman, D. J., & Van Essen, D. C. (1991). Distributed hierarchical processing in the primate cerebral cortex. Cerebral Cortex (New York, N.Y. , 1(1), 1–47. https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/1.1.1-a Fischl, B. (2012). FreeSurfer. Neuroimage , 62 (2), 774–781. https://doi.org/10.1006/cbmr.1996.0014 Fischl, B., Sereno, M. I., & Dale, A. M. (1999). Cortical surface-based analysis. II: Inflation, flattening, and a surface-based coordinate system. NeuroImage , 9(2), 195–207. https://doi.org/10.1006/nimg.1998.0396 Fisher, C., & Freiwald, W. A. (2015). Contrasting Specializations for Facial Motion within the Macaque Face-Processing System. Current Biology , 25 (2), 261–266. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2014.11.038 Gross, C. G. (2008). Single neuron studies of inferior temporal cortex. Neuropsychologia, Consciousness and Perception: Insights and Hindsights , 46 (3), 841–852. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2007.11.009 Gross, C. G., Rocha-Miranda, C. E., & Bender, D. B. (1972). Visual properties of neurons in inferotemporal cortex of the Macaque. Journal of Neurophysiology , 35 (1), 96–111. https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.1972.35.1.96 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684240 doi: bioRxiv preprint

38 

Harrison, S. A., & Tong, F. (2009). Decoding reveals the contents of visual working memory in early visual areas. Nature , 458 (7238), 632–635. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature07832 Haynes, J.-D. (2015). A Primer on Pattern-Based Approaches to fMRI: Principles, Pitfalls, and Perspectives. Neuron , 87 (2), 257–270. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2015.05.025 Henderson, M. M., Tarr, M. J., & Wehbe, L. (2023). Low-level tuning biases in higher visual cortex reflect the semantic informativeness of visual features. Journal of Vision , 23 (4), 8. https://doi.org/10.1167/jov.23.4.8 Henriksson, L., Nurminen, L., Hyvärinen, A., & Vanni, S. (2008). Spatial frequency tuning in human retinotopic visual areas. Journal of Vision , 8(10), 5. https://doi.org/10.1167/8.10.5 Higgins, I., Racanière, S., & Rezende, D. (2022). Symmetry-Based Representations for Artificial and Biological General Intelligence. Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience , 16 .https://doi.org/10.3389/fncom.2022.836498 Hubel, D. H., & Wiesel, T. N. (1962). Receptive fields, binocular interaction and functional architecture in the cat’s visual cortex. The Journal of Physiology , 160 (1), 106-154.2. https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.1962.sp006837 Janssens, T., Zhu, Q., Popivanov, I. D., & Vanduffel, W. (2014). Probabilistic and Single-Subject Retinotopic Maps Reveal the Topographic Organization of Face Patches in the Macaque Cortex. 

Journal of Neuroscience , 34 (31), 10156–10167. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2914-13.2013 Jiang, R., Andolina, I. M., Li, M., & Tang, S. (2021). Clustered functional domains for curves and corners in cortical area V4. eLife , 10 , e63798. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.63798 Johnston, W. J., & Freedman, D. J. (2023). Redundant representations are required to disambiguate simultaneously presented complex stimuli. PLOS Computational Biology , 19 (8), e1011327. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1011327 Johnston, W. J., Palmer, S. E., & Freedman, D. J. (2020). Nonlinear mixed selectivity supports reliable neural computation. PLOS Computational Biology , 16 (2), e1007544. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1007544 Jones, J. P., & Palmer, L. A. (1987). An evaluation of the two-dimensional Gabor filter model of simple receptive fields in cat striate cortex. Journal of Neurophysiology , 58 (6), 1233–1258. https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.1987.58.6.1233 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684240 doi: bioRxiv preprint

39 

Kamitani, Y., & Tong, F. (2005). Decoding the visual and subjective contents of the human brain. Nature Neuroscience , 8(5), 679–685. https://doi.org/10.1038/nn1444 Karami, B., & Schwiedrzik, C. M. (2024). Visual perceptual learning of feature conjunctions leverages non-linear mixed selectivity. NPJ Science of Learning , 9, 13. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41539-024-00226-wKay, K. N., Naselaris, T., Prenger, R. J., & Gallant, J. L. (2008). Identifying natural images from human brain activity. Nature , 452 (7185), 352–355. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature06713 Kira, S., Safaai, H., Morcos, A. S., Panzeri, S., & Harvey, C. D. (2023). A distributed and efficient population code of mixed selectivity neurons for flexible navigation decisions. Nature Communications , 14 (1), Article 1. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-37804-2 Kolster, H., Janssens, T., Orban, G. A., & Vanduffel, W. (2014). The Retinotopic Organization of Macaque Occipitotemporal Cortex Anterior to V4 and Caudoventral to the Middle Temporal (MT) Cluster. 

Journal of Neuroscience , 34 (31), 10168–10191. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3288-13.2014 Kondat, T., Tik, N., Sharon, H., Tavor, I., & Censor, N. (2024). Distinct Neural Plasticity Enhancing Visual Perception. Journal of Neuroscience , 44 (36). https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0301-24.2024 Kravitz, D. J., Saleem, K. S., Baker, C. I., Ungerleider, L. G., & Mishkin, M. (2013). The ventral visual pathway: An expanded neural framework for the processing of object quality. Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 17 (1), 26–49. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2012.10.011 Kumar, S., Popivanov, I. D., & Vogels, R. (2019). Transformation of Visual Representations Across Ventral Stream Body-selective Patches. Cerebral Cortex , 29 (1), 215–229. https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhx320 Lafer-Sousa, R., & Conway, B. R. (2013). Parallel, multi-stage processing of colors, faces and shapes in macaque inferior temporal cortex. Nature Neuroscience , 16 (12), 1870–1878. https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.3555 Lee, S. W., O’Doherty, J. P., & Shimojo, S. (2015). Neural computations mediating one-shot learning in the human brain. PLoS Biology , 13 (4), e1002137. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.1002137 Leite, F. P., Tsao, D., Vanduffel, W., Fize, D., Sasaki, Y., Wald, L. L., Dale, A. M., Kwong, K. K., Orban, G. A., Rosen, B. R., Tootell, R. B. H., & Mandeville, J. B. (2002). Repeated fMRI Using Iron Oxide 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684240 doi: bioRxiv preprint

40 

Contrast Agent in Awake, Behaving Macaques at 3 Tesla. NeuroImage , 16 (2), 283–294. https://doi.org/10.1006/nimg.2002.1110 Li, H., Hu, D., Tanigawa, H., & Takahata, T. (2024). Topographic organization across foveal visual areas in macaques. Frontiers in Neuroanatomy , 18 . https://doi.org/10.3389/fnana.2024.1389067 Li, W. (2016). Perceptual Learning: Use-Dependent Cortical Plasticity. Annual Review of Vision Science ,

2(Volume 2, 2016), 109–130. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-vision-111815-114351 Liu, M.-L., Liu, Y.-P., Guo, X.-X., Wu, Z.-Y., Zhang, X.-T., Roe, A. W., & Hu, J.-M. (2024). Orientation selectivity mapping in the visual cortex. Progress in Neurobiology , 240 , 102656. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pneurobio.2024.102656 Liu, Y., Li, M., Zhang, X., Lu, Y., Gong, H., Yin, J., Chen, Z., Qian, L., Yang, Y., Andolina, I. M., Shipp, S., Mcloughlin, N., Tang, S., & Wang, W. (2020). Hierarchical Representation for Chromatic Processing across Macaque V1, V2, and V4. Neuron , 108 (3), 538-550.e5. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2020.07.037 Livingstone, M. S., & Hubel, D. H. (1984). Anatomy and physiology of a color system in the primate visual cortex. Journal of Neuroscience , 4(1), 309–356. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.04-01-00309.1984 Lu, Y., Yin, J., Chen, Z., Gong, H., Liu, Y., Qian, L., Li, X., Liu, R., Andolina, I. M., & Wang, W. (2018). Revealing Detail along the Visual Hierarchy: Neural Clustering Preserves Acuity from V1 to V4. 

Neuron , 98 (2), 417-428.e3. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2018.03.009 Lu, Z., Doerig, A., Bosch, V., Krahmer, B., Kaiser, D., Cichy, R. M., & Kietzmann, T. C. (2025). End-to-end topographic networks as models of cortical map formation and human visual behaviour. Nature Human Behaviour , 1–17. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-025-02220-7 Luo, W., Li, Y., Urtasun, R., & Zemel, R. (2016). Understanding the Effective Receptive Field in Deep Convolutional Neural Networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 29 .https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2016/hash/c8067ad1937f728f51288b3eb986afaa-Abstract.html Manenti, G. L., Dizaji, A. S., & Schwiedrzik, C. M. (2023). Variability in training unlocks generalization in visual perceptual learning through invariant representations. Current Biology , 33 (5), 817-826.e3. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2023.01.011 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684240 doi: bioRxiv preprint

41 

Margalit, E., Lee, H., Finzi, D., DiCarlo, J. J., Grill-Spector, K., & Yamins, D. L. K. (2024). A unifying framework for functional organization in early and higher ventral visual cortex. Neuron , 112 (14), 2435-2451.e7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2024.04.018 Marquardt, I., Schneider, M., Gulban, O. F., Ivanov, D., & Uludağ, K. (2018). Cortical depth profiles of luminance contrast responses in human V1 and V2 using 7 T fMRI. Human Brain Mapping , 39 (7), 2812–2827. https://doi.org/10.1002/hbm.24042 Maunsell, J. H. R., Sclar, G., Nealey, T. A., & DePriest, D. D. (1991). Extraretinal representations in area V4 in the macaque monkey. Visual Neuroscience , 7(6), 561–573. https://doi.org/10.1017/S095252380001035X Milham, M., Petkov, C., Belin, P., Hamed, S. B., Evrard, H., Fair, D., Fox, A., Froudist-Walsh, S., Hayashi, T., Kastner, S., Klink, C., Majka, P., Mars, R., Messinger, A., Poirier, C., Schroeder, C., Shmuel, A., Silva, A. C., Vanduffel, W., … Zuo, Z. (2022). Toward next-generation primate neuroscience: A collaboration-based strategic plan for integrative neuroimaging. Neuron , 110 (1), 16–20. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2021.10.015 Moeller, S., Freiwald, W. A., & Tsao, D. Y. (2008). Patches with Links: A Unified System for Processing Faces in the Macaque Temporal Lobe. Science , 320 (5881), 1355–1359. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1157436 Movellan, J. R. (2002). Tutorial on Gabor filters. Open Source Document , 40 , 1–23. Nadler, J. W., & DeAngelis, G. C. (2005). Precision pooling predicts primate perceptual performance. 

Nature Neuroscience , 8(1), Article 1. https://doi.org/10.1038/nn0105-12 Namima, T., Yasuda, M., Banno, T., Okazawa, G., & Komatsu, H. (2014). Effects of luminance contrast on the color selectivity of neurons in the macaque area v4 and inferior temporal cortex. The Journal of Neuroscience: The Official Journal of the Society for Neuroscience , 34 (45), 14934–14947. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2289-14.2014 Nasr, S., & Tootell, R. B. H. (2012). A Cardinal Orientation Bias in Scene-Selective Visual Cortex. Journal of Neuroscience , 32 (43), 14921–14926. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2036-12.2012 Nigam, T., & Schwiedrzik, C. M. (2024). Predictions enable top-down pattern separation in the macaque face-processing hierarchy. Nature Communications , 15 (1), 7196. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-51543-y 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684240 doi: bioRxiv preprint

42 

Op de Beeck, H. P., Haushofer, J., & Kanwisher, N. G. (2008). Interpreting fMRI data: Maps, modules and dimensions. Nature Reviews Neuroscience , 9(2), 123–135. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn2314 Orban, G. A., & Vogels, R. (1998). The neuronal machinery involved in successive orientation discrimination. Progress in Neurobiology , 55 (2), 117–147. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0301-0082(98)00010-0 Pinsk, M. A., Arcaro, M., Weiner, K. S., Kalkus, J. F., Inati, S. J., Gross, C. G., & Kastner, S. (2009). Neural Representations of Faces and Body Parts in Macaque and Human Cortex: A Comparative fMRI Study. Journal of Neurophysiology , 101 (5), 2581–2600. https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.91198.2008 Pollen, D. A., Lee, J. R., & Taylor, J. H. (1971). How Does the Striate Cortex Begin the Reconstruction of the Visual World? Science , 173 (3991), 74–77. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.173.3991.74 Purushothaman, G., & Bradley, D. C. (2005). Neural population code for fine perceptual decisions in area MT. Nature Neuroscience , 8(1), Article 1. https://doi.org/10.1038/nn1373 Ramirez-Cardenas, A., Moskaleva, M., & Nieder, A. (2016). Neuronal Representation of Numerosity Zero in the Primate Parieto-Frontal Number Network. Current Biology , 26 (10), 1285–1294. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2016.03.052 Reddy, L., & Kanwisher, N. (2006). Coding of visual objects in the ventral stream. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, Sensory Systems , 16 (4), 408–414. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.conb.2006.06.004 Rice, G. E., Watson, D. M., Hartley, T., & Andrews, T. J. (2014). Low-Level Image Properties of Visual Objects Predict Patterns of Neural Response across Category-Selective Regions of the Ventral Visual Pathway. Journal of Neuroscience , 34 (26), 8837–8844. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5265-13.2014 Riesenhuber, M., & Poggio, T. (1999). Hierarchical models of object recognition in cortex. Nature Neuroscience , 2(11), 1019–1025. https://doi.org/10.1038/14819 Rigotti, M., Barak, O., Warden, M. R., Wang, X.-J., Daw, N. D., Miller, E. K., & Fusi, S. (2013). The importance of mixed selectivity in complex cognitive tasks. Nature , 497 (7451), Article 7451. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature12160 Roe, A. W., & Ts’o, D. Y. (1999). Specificity of Color Connectivity Between Primate V1 and V2. Journal of Neurophysiology , 82 (5), 2719–2730. https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.1999.82.5.2719 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684240 doi: bioRxiv preprint

43 

Saleem, K. S., Avram, A. V., Glen, D., Yen, C. C.-C., Ye, F. Q., Komlosh, M., & Basser, P. J. (2021). High-resolution mapping and digital atlas of subcortical regions in the macaque monkey based on matched MAP-MRI and histology. NeuroImage , 245 , 118759. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2021.118759 Schrimpf, M., Kubilius, J., Hong, H., Majaj, N. J., Rajalingham, R., Issa, E. B., Kar, K., Bashivan, P., Prescott-Roy, J., Geiger, F., Schmidt, K., Yamins, D. L. K., & DiCarlo, J. J. (2020). Brain-Score: Which Artificial Neural Network for Object Recognition is most Brain-Like? (p. 407007). bioRxiv. https://doi.org/10.1101/407007 Schwiedrzik, C. M., Zarco, W., Everling, S., & Freiwald, W. A. (2015). Face Patch Resting State Networks Link Face Processing to Social Cognition. PLOS Biology , 13 (9), e1002245. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.1002245 Semedo, J. D., Zandvakili, A., Machens, C. K., Yu, B. M., & Kohn, A. (2019). Cortical Areas Interact through a Communication Subspace. Neuron , 102 (1), 249-259.e4. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2019.01.026 Shadlen, M. N., Britten, K. H., Newsome, W. T., & Movshon, J. A. (1996). A computational analysis of the relationship between neuronal and behavioral responses to visual motion. Journal of Neuroscience ,

16 (4), 1486–1510. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.16-04-01486.1996 Sigala, N., & Logothetis, N. K. (2002). Visual categorization shapes feature selectivity in the primate temporal cortex. Nature , 415 (6869), 318–320. https://doi.org/10.1038/415318a Simonyan, K., Vedaldi, A., & Zisserman, A. (2014). Deep Inside Convolutional Networks: Visualising Image Classification Models and Saliency Maps (arXiv:1312.6034). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1312.6034 Sompolinsky, H., & Shapley, R. (1997). New perspectives on the mechanisms for orientation selectivity. 

Current Opinion in Neurobiology , 7(4), 514–522. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0959-4388(97)80031-1 Sorscher, B., Ganguli, S., & Sompolinsky, H. (2022). Neural representational geometry underlies few-shot concept learning. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 119 (43), e2200800119. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2200800119 Sporns, O. (2016). Networks of the Brain . MIT Press. 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684240 doi: bioRxiv preprint

44 

Sporns, O., Honey, C. J., & Kötter, R. (2007). Identification and Classification of Hubs in Brain Networks. 

PLOS ONE , 2(10), e1049. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0001049 Stemmann, H., & Freiwald, W. A. (2019). Evidence for an attentional priority map in inferotemporal cortex. 

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 116 (47), 23797–23805. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1821866116 Sundararajan, M., Taly, A., & Yan, Q. (2017). Axiomatic Attribution for Deep Networks. Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning , 3319–3328. https://proceedings.mlr.press/v70/sundararajan17a.html Tanigawa, H., Lu, H. D., & Roe, A. W. (2010). Functional organization for color and orientation in macaque V4. Nature Neuroscience , 13 (12), Article 12. https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.2676 Taylor, J., & Xu, Y. (2022). Representation of color, form, and their conjunction across the human ventral visual pathway. NeuroImage , 251 , 118941. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2022.118941 Tong, F., & Pratte, M. S. (2012). Decoding Patterns of Human Brain Activity. Annual Review of Psychology ,

63 (Volume 63, 2012), 483–509. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-psych-120710-100412 Toosi, R., Karami, B., Koushki, R., Shakerian, F., Noroozi, J., Rezayat, E., Vahabie, A.-H., Akhaee, M. A., & Dehaqani, M.-R. A. (2025). The Spatial Frequency Representation Predicts Category Coding in the Inferior Temporal Cortex. eLife , 13 . https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.93589.3 Tsao, D. Y., Freiwald, W. A., Tootell, R. B. H., & Livingstone, M. S. (2006). A Cortical Region Consisting Entirely of Face-Selective Cells. Science , 311 (5761), 670–674. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1119983 Ullman, S. (2007). Object recognition and segmentation by a fragment-based hierarchy. Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 11 (2), 58–64. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2006.11.009 Valette, J., Guillermier, M., Boumezbeur, F., Poupon, C., Amadon, A., Hantraye, P., & Lebon, V. (2006). B0 homogeneity throughout the monkey brain is strongly improved in the sphinx position as compared to the supine position. Journal of Magnetic Resonance Imaging , 23 (3), 408–412. https://doi.org/10.1002/jmri.20511 Van Essen, D. C., Lewis, J. W., Drury, H. A., Hadjikhani, N., Tootell, R. B. H., Bakircioglu, M., & Miller, M. I. (2001). Mapping visual cortex in monkeys and humans using surface-based atlases. Vision Research , 41 (10), 1359–1378. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0042-6989(01)00045-1 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684240 doi: bioRxiv preprint

45 

Vanduffel, W., Tootell, R. B. H., Schoups, A. A., & Orban, G. A. (2002). The Organization of Orientation Selectivity Throughout Macaque Visual Cortex. Cerebral Cortex , 12 (6), 647–662. https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/12.6.647 Vladusich, T., Lucassen, M. P., & Cornelissen, F. W. (2006). Do Cortical Neurons Process Luminance or Contrast to Encode Surface Properties? Journal of Neurophysiology , 95 (4), 2638–2649. https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.01016.2005 Vogels, R., & Orban, G. A. (1993). Chapter 35 Responses of monkey infero-temporal units in an orientation discrimination task. In T. P. Hicks, S. Molotchnikoff, & T. Ono (Eds.), Progress in Brain Research 

(Vol. 95, pp. 427–444). Elsevier. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0079-6123(08)60386-6 Vogels, R., Saunders, R. C., & Orban, G. A. (1997). Effects of Inferior Temporal Lesions on Two Types of Orientation Discrimination in the Macaque Monkey. European Journal of Neuroscience , 9(2), 229– 245. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1460-9568.1997.tb01394.x Wang, J., Du, X., Yao, S., Li, L., Tanigawa, H., Zhang, X., & Roe, A. W. (2024). Mesoscale organization of ventral and dorsal visual pathways in macaque monkey revealed by 7T fMRI. Progress in Neurobiology , 234 , 102584. Weerd, P. D., Desimone, R., & Ungerleider, L. G. (1996). Cue-dependent deficits in grating orientation discrimination after V4 lesions in macaques. Visual Neuroscience , 13 (3), 529–538. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0952523800008208 Yamins, D. L. K., & DiCarlo, J. J. (2016). Using goal-driven deep learning models to understand sensory cortex. Nature Neuroscience , 19 (3), 356–365. https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.4244 Yamins, D. L. K., Hong, H., Cadieu, C. F., Solomon, E. A., Seibert, D., & DiCarlo, J. J. (2014). Performance-optimized hierarchical models predict neural responses in higher visual cortex. 

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 111 (23), 8619–8624. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1403112111 Yao, M., Wen, B., Yang, M., Guo, J., Jiang, H., Feng, C., Cao, Y., He, H., & Chang, L. (2023). High-dimensional topographic organization of visual features in the primate temporal lobe. Nature Communications , 14 (1), 5931. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-41584-0 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684240 doi: bioRxiv preprint

46 

Zhou, Y., Rosen, M. C., Swaminathan, S. K., Masse, N. Y., Zhu, O., & Freedman, D. J. (2021). Distributed functions of prefrontal and parietal cortices during sequential categorical decisions. eLife , 10 ,e58782. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.58782 Zhu, Q., Li, X., Popivanov, I. D., Polimeni, J. R., Vogels, R., & Vanduffel, W. (2025). Mesoscale functional organization of face and body areas in the macaque brain. Nature Communications , 16 (1), 8862. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-63962-6 Zylberberg, J. (2018). The role of untuned neurons in sensory information coding (p. 134379). bioRxiv. https://doi.org/10.1101/134379