NEURONS: Emulating the Human Visual Cortex Improves Fidelity and
Interpretability in fMRI-to-Video Reconstruction
Haonan Wang*, Qixiang Zhang*, Lehan Wang, Xuanqi Huang, Xiaomeng Li†
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
{hwanggr, qzhangcq, lwangdk, xhuangdp}@connect.ust.hk, eexmli@ust.hk
Abstract
Decoding visual stimuli from neural activity is essential
for understanding the human brain.
While fMRI meth-
ods have successfully reconstructed static images, fMRI-to-
video reconstruction faces challenges due to the need for
capturing spatiotemporal dynamics like motion and scene
transitions.
Recent approaches have improved semantic
and perceptual alignment but struggle to integrate coarse
fMRI data with detailed visual features. Inspired by the
hierarchical organization of the visual system, we propose
NEURONS, a novel framework that decouples learning into
four correlated sub-tasks: key object segmentation, con-
cept recognition, scene description, and blurry video re-
construction. This approach simulates the visual cortex’s
functional specialization, allowing the model to capture di-
verse video content. In the inference stage, NEURONS gen-
erates robust conditioning signals for a pre-trained text-
to-video diffusion model to reconstruct the videos.
Ex-
tensive experiments demonstrate that NEURONS outper-
forms state-of-the-art baselines, achieving solid improve-
ments in video consistency (26.6%) and semantic-level ac-
curacy (19.1%). Notably, NEURONS shows a strong func-
tional correlation with the visual cortex, highlighting its
potential for brain-computer interfaces and clinical ap-
plications.
Code and model weights are available at:
https://github.com/xmed-lab/NEURONS.
1. Introduction
Decoding visual stimuli from neural activity offers a critical
pathway to unraveling the intricate mechanisms of the hu-
man brain. Current approaches have demonstrated remark-
able success in leveraging non-invasive functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) data to reconstruct static images
(fMRI-to-image)
[8, 26, 33, 34] by capitalizing on ad-
vanced deep learning architectures such as CLIP [28] and
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author: eexmli@ust.hk.
man? woman? bed? 
window? tree? 
sky?
A woman sitting on 
a bed looking out a 
window at palm 
trees
Key Object 
Segmentation
Concepts 
Recognition
Scene
Description
Blurry Video 
Reconstruction
Neurons
Visual Stimuli
(Videos)
Human Visual Cortex
V1
V2
SPL
V3
V5
OPA
PPA
ITC
V4
edges •
shapes •
contours •
object recognition •
face recognition •
… •
scenes •
environments •
… •
motion information •
dynamic visual •
information
spatial perception •
… •
CLIP Text 
Features
CLIP Vision 
Features
Previous Methods
Brain Model
align
align
Implicit
- Explicit tasks
Figure 1. Previous methods [4, 10] implicitly align the brain model
with the highly coupled CLIP vision and text hidden features. Re-
search has demonstrated that distinct regions of the human visual
cortex are responsible for processing different types of visual in-
formation.
Drawing inspiration from the human visual cortex,
where distinct regions specialize in processing different aspects of
visual information, we decouple the fMRI-to-video reconstruction
task into four corresponding sub-tasks, thereby capturing the full
spectrum of visual information in video stimuli.
Stable Diffusion [32].
These frameworks bridge neuro-
science and artiﬁcial intelligence, enabling data-driven ex-
ploration of the cerebral cortex’s functions.
However, extending these advances to fMRI-to-video re-
construction remains a formidable challenge. Unlike static
images, video decoding requires capturing the spatiotem-
poral dynamics of continuous visual streams—including
object motions, scene transitions, and temporal coher-
ence—which existing models struggle to represent holis-
This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.
18367


tically. Early studies [19, 26, 42, 45] faced challenges in
achieving satisfactory reconstruction performance as they
struggled to extract precise semantics from pre-trained dif-
fusion models.
MinD-Video [4] addresses semantic is-
sues by conditioning the diffusion model on visual fMRI
features, but it lacks low-level visual detailing, diverging
from the brain’s visual system and limiting perception of
continuous details. NeuroClips [10] advances the ﬁeld by
introducing a semantics reconstructor for accurate video
keyframe reconstruction and a perception reconstructor for
blurry video reconstruction. However, the main reconstruc-
tion process relies on aligning the brain model with CLIP
features implicitly, i.e., aligning in the hidden feature space,
which is not robust. The reason is that the CLIP hidden
feature space is highly semantic but the fMRI voxels are
encoded with multi-granularity information (Fig. 1).
Emulating the functional architecture of the visual cor-
tex offers a promising strategy to improve the decoding of
brain activity.
Prior research has demonstrated that dis-
tinct regions within the visual cortex are specialized for
processing different levels of visual information granular-
ity [16, 21, 25, 44] (see Fig. 1). Inspired by the hierar-
chical organization of the human visual system, we de-
sign the learning framework as a composition of multiple
sub-tasks, each reﬂecting speciﬁc perceptual roles. For ex-
ample, early visual areas such as V1 and V2 are involved
in encoding low-level visual features—such as edges and
shapes—which parallels the function of segmentation mod-
ules in computer vision. However, segmenting every ob-
ject in a video is impractical due to the inherent limitations
of human memory in retaining detailed video information.
Since individuals predominantly focus on key objects and
salient features within scenes rather than processing all ﬁner
details [17], we introduce the key object segmentation task,
which trains the brain model to initially learn the shapes and
contours of key objects. Subsequently, we progressively
incorporate more complex semantic concepts and motion
information through the concept recognition task, which
mimics the object and face recognition processes in areas
V4 and ITC, compensating for the semantic loss incurred
by focusing solely on key objects. Then, the scene descrip-
tion task enables the brain model to identify correlations
between concepts and generate coherent scene descriptions.
Finally, the blurry video reconstruction task integrates mo-
tion and color distribution information. These four tasks are
learned using a progressive strategy that mirrors the hierar-
chical structure of the visual cortex.
To construct these tasks, we leverage off-the-shelf
vision-language foundation models to generate key object
segmentation masks, class labels, and scene descriptions.
Building on this, we propose a novel framework named
NEURONS, which simulates the functional behaviors of
neurons in the human visual cortex. NEURONS addresses
the decoupled tasks through multiple specialized projec-
tions, each designed to model speciﬁc aspects of visual in-
formation processing. For Key Object Segmentation, we
train a text-driven video decoder to generate masks for the
key object in a video, guided by the key object class name.
For Concept Recognition, we train the brain model to rec-
ognize semantic concepts in the video through a multi-label
classiﬁcation task.
For Scene Description, we teach the
brain model to describe the video by decoding text embed-
dings into captions. Finally, for Blurry Video Reconstruc-
tion, the brain model is guided to align with the latent space
of the Stable Diffusion’s VAE [32], using the same video
decoder as in segmentation but replacing the segmentation
head with a reconstruction head. During inference, the de-
coupled task outputs of NEURONS serve as robust condi-
tioning signals for a pre-trained text-to-video (T2V) diffu-
sion model, enabling high-ﬁdelity video reconstruction with
improved temporal smoothness and semantic consistency.
Extensive experiments show that NEURONS outperforms
state-of-the-art baselines, especially on video-based met-
rics.
It improves spatiotemporal consistency by 0.196
(26.6%) and semantic metrics by 0.042 (19.1%) on average.
The proposed sub-tasks enhance shape, location, and se-
mantic extraction, and their decoupling boosts brain activ-
ity decoding. Mapping sub-task projections onto the brain’s
visual regions reveals functional alignment with the human
visual cortex.
2. Related Works
2.1. fMRI-to-Video Reconstruction
Recently, the decoding of original visual stimuli (e.g., im-
ages and videos) from brain functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) has garnered signiﬁcant attention.
This
interest stems from its crucial role in uncovering the in-
tricate mechanisms of the human brain [37], as well as
its remarkable potential to facilitate novel clinical assess-
ment methods and advance brain-computer interface appli-
cations [45]. Early exploration on this topic mainly focuses
on how to decode fMRI signals into concepts [15], and in re-
cent years, the reconstruction of static images [1, 9, 24, 37]
and dynamic videos [10, 20] have also witnessed some pro-
gresses. The typical paradigm consists of two crucial steps:
1) Align the representations of fMRI and visual stimuli
and map them both to the CLIP [28] embedding space; 2)
utilize generative models (e.g., diffusion model [31], gen-
erative adversarial network [11]) to reconstruct the visual
stimuli. More recently, some researchers started to explore
the more challenging reconstruction task from fMRI to dy-
namic video stimuli. For example, MinD-Video [4] suc-
cessfully reconstructs videos from fMRI at a relatively low
FPS. NeuroClips [10] attempted to improve the semantic
accuracy and video smoothness with a stronger semantic
18368


alignment paradigm and a more detailed perception captur-
ing. The main reconstruction process of these methods re-
lies on aligning the brain model with CLIP features implic-
itly, i.e., aligning in the hidden feature space, which is not
robust. The reason is that the CLIP hidden feature space
is highly semantic, but the fMRI voxels are encoded with
multi-granularity information.
2.2. Diffusion Models for Video Synthesis
Recently, the diffusion model has garnered signiﬁcant at-
tention in the generative artiﬁcial intelligence communi-
ties.
The breakthrough came with Ho et al. [14], who
introduced the Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Model
(DDPM), demonstrating high-quality image synthesis com-
parable to GANs.
In the static image generation realm,
after DDPM, DALLE-2 [29] incorporate CLIP to improve
the performance of text-to-image synthesis. Stable Diffu-
sion [32] improved generation efﬁciency by performing the
diffusion process in the latent space of VQVAE [39]. In the
more difﬁcult realm, i.e., dynamic video synthesis, the typi-
cal pipeline is to incorporate an additional temporal module
to improve the smoothness of the generated videos. For ex-
ample, Blattmann et al. [2] introduced a Temporal Autoen-
coder Finetuning paradigm, which achieved high-resolution
and high-fps video generation. More recently, AnimateD-
iff [12] introduced an innovative temporal motion module
that seamlessly extends existing diffusion models for static
image generation into dynamic video generation.
3. Methodology
The overall framework of NEURONS is illustrated in Fig. 3.
NEURONS simulates the functional behaviors of neurons in
the human visual cortex by learning four decoupled tasks,
the construction of which is detailed in §3.1. The technical
core of NEURONS consists of three main components: (1)
a Brain Model that maps fMRI representations to motion
embeddings (§3.2), (2) a Decoupler that disentangles the
training of motion embeddings into progressive and explicit
sub-tasks (§3.3), and (3) an aggregated video reconstruction
pipeline that integrates the outputs of all sub-tasks to guide
high-quality video reconstruction (§3.4).
3.1. Decoupled Tasks Construction
We respectively carry out four task-setting build-up pro-
cesses: scene description generation, concept name genera-
tion, concept segmentation mask generation, and rule-based
key object discovery, as illustrated in Fig. 2.
Scene Description Generation.
To build the task set-
ting for the scene description task, we need to gener-
ate a descriptive caption for each frame.
The key tool
we utilize is the Qwen2.5-VL-72B-Instruct [43]. Firstly,
we input the frame image into Qwen, and instruct it
to provide a detailed one-phrase caption for the image,
Prompt: …You need to generate a descriptive caption
for the given image, keep the caption in one phrase…
Qwen: A woman sitting on a bed looking out a
window at palm trees
Scene Description Generation
Prompt: …You need to identify key objects in the
image, and list their formal names in WordNet…
Qwen: [Woman, Tree, Bed, Window]
Concept Name Generation
Prompt: Segment the [Woman, Tree, Bed, Window]
in the given image.
Concept Segmentation Mask Generation
Grounded 
SAM
Woman
Tree
Bed
…
Woman
Tree
Bed
Window
Rule-based Key Object Discovery
Figure 2. Decoupled Tasks Construction.
such as “a woman sitting on a bed looking
out a window at palm trees”. The detailed in-
struction prompts for scene description generation are illus-
trated in Supplementary § A.
Concept Name Generation. To build the task setting for
the concept recognition, we need to generate the concept
names of the key objects in each frame. Similarly, we ﬁrst
input the frame into Qwen. Then, we instruct the Qwen
to recognize the primary objects (e.g., ['woman', 'bed',
'tree', ...]) in Fig. 2) in the frame. The primary objects will
then be categorized into 51 concepts (['animal', 'human',
'plant', 'furniture', ...]), which are summarized from
the WordNet [5]. The output format is a concept name list
(e.g., ['human', 'furniture', 'plant'] for Fig. 2) that
covers all primary objects in the frame. The detailed in-
struction prompts for concept name generation and the 51-
concept list are in Supplementary § A.
Concept Segmentation Mask Generation. Now, we uti-
lize the object list for each frame to generate segmentation
masks for the primary objects in each frame. We input each
frame along with its object list into Grounded-SAM [30]
and instruct it to generate a binary mask for each object us-
ing the object names from the list as textual prompts.
Rule-based Key Object Discovery. We propose a multi-
criteria approach to identify key objects in video sequences
by integrating motion dynamics, object size, and semantic
importance. Background categories (e.g., sky, ocean) are
18369


A woman sitting on a 
bed looking out a 
window at palm trees
fMRI  ℱ
ℬ(#)
!!"#(#)
MRI Video Embedding
…
MRI Text Feature
Video Embedding
…
Text Feature
Video Alignment
Text Alignment
CLIP Text
Qwen
fMRI
Voxels
ℬ(#)
Video Stimulation
!!"#(#)
!$%$(#)
!&#(#)
Concepts
Scenario
Obj. 
Low-level
ℒ!"#
ℒ$%$
ℒ#&'
!&'(#)
woman
man? woman? bed? 
window? tree? sky?
woman, bed, 
window, tree
A woman sitting on a 
bed looking out a 
window at palm trees
ℒ(&!
VAE
Mot. & Color
Diffusion 
Prior
MLP
ℳ(#)
…
MRI text Embedding
MRI Video Embedding
!!"#(#)
!$%$(#)
Cross Attention
Query
Key
Value
man? woman? 
bed? window? 
tree? sky?
A woman sitting on a 
bed looking out a 
window at palm trees
VAE Decoder 
!&#(#)
!&'(#)
NEURONS - Decoupler
Decoupled 
Tasks 
Construction
(Fig. 2)
CLIP Vision
NEURONS - Decoupler
NEURONS
NEURONS - Brain Model
NEURONS - Brain Model
Progressive learning
!$(#)
Video 
Embedding
 ℱ
Vision
Embedding
Figure 3. The overall framework of NEURONS comprises two primary components: the Brain Model (§3.2) and the Decoupler (§3.3). The
Brain Model is responsible for mapping fMRI representations to motion embeddings, while the Decoupler decouples these embeddings
into distinct explicit sub-tasks, including key object segmentation, concept recognition, scene description, and blurry video reconstruction.
These four tasks are progressively learned by dynamically adjusting the loss weights. The outputs generated from these sub-tasks are
subsequently utilized to reconstruct the ﬁnal videos during the inference stage, as illustrated in Fig. 4.
excluded using predeﬁned labels. For remaining objects,
inter-frame displacement is calculated, with higher weights
for priority categories like humans and animals (e.g., per-
son, dog, cat) to reﬂect semantic importance. Objects are
ranked by weighted displacement, and excessively large
ones (i.e., >50% of the image area) are ﬁltered out. Priority
categories are selected ﬁrst; otherwise, top-ranked objects
by motion dynamics are chosen. If all objects are back-
ground, the largest one is selected as a fallback to ensure at
least one key object is identiﬁed.
3.2. NEURONS - Brain Model
The brain model aims to encode fMRI voxels into video
embeddings. Its training serves as a pre-training stage to
produce suitable video embeddings, preparing for subse-
quent decoupled tasks.
After preprocessing, a video is
split into several clips at two-second intervals (i.e., fMRI
time resolution), each video clip yc has six frames yc →
RB→F →C→H→W where F the number of frames and F = 6.
xc is the corresponding fMRI signal of video clip c. We
use the same pre-trained MindEyeV2 [34] (details are il-
lustrated in Supplementary §B.1).
Previous approaches
like NeuroClips directly align the image embeddings from
the backbone, overlooking temporal relationships between
consecutive frames. Instead, we use a motion projection
Pvid(·) to map the image embeddings ei →RB→N→C to
spatial-temporal space ev →RB→F →N→C. We use the same
bidirectional contrastive loss as in [10, 34] called BiM-
ixCo, denoted as LCLIPv, which combines MixCo and con-
trastive loss, to align ev with the target video embeddings
of CLIP vision encoder, detailed in Supplementary §B.1.
Then, we embed ev to obtain the text embedding et. A con-
trastive learning loss between CLIP text embedding and et
is adopted to train the additional text modality. The con-
trastive loss serves as the training loss LCLIPt of this pro-
cess, similar to LCLIPv, omitted here. This pre-alignment
provides feasible vision and text features which are then fed
into the Decoupler for decoupled task learning.
18370


ControlNet
Pretrained 
T2V Diffusion
as latent
unCLIP
!!"!(#)
!#$(#)
!#%(#)
Motion Embedding (6 frames)
mean
A woman sitting on a 
bed looking out a 
window at palm trees
condition
condition
3D flow
1D/2D flow
!&'$(#)
Top-1
Figure 4. Inference pipeline of NEURONS. We use the gener-
ated key object masks as condition to control image generation
and blurry video generation, and the generated scene description
as text prompt to T2V Diffusion.
3.3. NEURONS - Decoupler: Decoupled Explicit
Tasks Learning
Starting from a key object segmentation task that requires
minimum semantic information, we progressively teach
NEURONS to learn more complex semantics through con-
cept recognition task (to recognize semantic concepts),
scene description task (to describe the video by decod-
ing text embeddings into captions), and blurry video re-
construction task (to learn motion information and color
distribution).
During inference, the decoupled task out-
puts of NEURONS serve as robust conditioning signals for
a pre-trained text-to-video (T2V) diffusion model, enabling
high-ﬁdelity video reconstruction with improved temporal
smoothness and semantic consistency.
Key Object Segmentation. The capacity of humans to re-
tain detailed memories of videos is inherently limited. Re-
search has shown that individuals tend to focus on key ob-
jects and salient features within a scene, often overlooking
ﬁner details [17]. This selective attention mechanism pro-
vides a foundational strategy to reduce the complexity of the
learning process. By initially focusing on key objects, we
can progressively introduce more complex semantic con-
cepts and motion information. To complete this task, we
design a text-driven video decoder that is based on the VAE
video decoder [40]. The decoder takes video embeddings
ev and text embeddings et as inputs. For this task, the text
embeddings are obtained by encoding the category name of
the key object with the CLIP text encoder. Then, a cross-
attention module is used to activate certain patches of ev
(as query Q) corresponding to et (as key K and value V ):
eseg = softmax( QK→
↑
d ) · V , the activated eseg is upsam-
pled to a higher resolution for pixel-level recognition. Fi-
nally, we use a simple segmentation head Dvs(·) to gener-
ate binary segmentation masks yseg for the key object in the
video. The objective function of this task is a binary cross-
entropy loss Lseg, detailed in Supplementary §B.2.
Concept Recognition. Despite the detailed visual infor-
mation we learn from the above segmentation and scene
description tasks, it is equally important to understand and
recognize the semantic concept in the frame image to pre-
vent semantic shifts. To this end, we incorporate a con-
cept recognition task by additionally involving a multi-label
classiﬁer Dcls(·) to recognize the key concepts inside the
frame image using the vision embedding of MRI. Speciﬁ-
cally, we impose the cross-entropy loss between the predic-
tion and the GT concept list (Sec. 3.1):
Lcls = Lce(Dcls( ¯ev), C),
(1)
where ¯ev represents the mean of ev computed along the
frame axis and C denotes the GT concept list.
Scene Description. Next, with the ability to identify key
objects and complementary concepts, the brain model is
taught to comprehensively describe the overall visual scene.
To achieve that, we incorporate a scene description task,
which aims to generate a descriptive caption for each frame
of the video. Speciﬁcally, we incorporate and ﬁnetune a
pre-trained text decoder Dtxt(·), which takes the text em-
beddings of the fMRI as input to generate the caption text.
Herein, we utilize the GPT-2 [27] as our text decoder. We
train the text decoder through preﬁx language modeling.
Speciﬁcally, given a ground-truth (GT) caption token se-
quence S = s0, s1, ..., s|S| and the corresponding text em-
bedding of the MRI et, our text decoder Dtxt(·) learns to
reconstruct S regarding et as the preﬁx. The objective func-
tion Ltxt can be described as follows:
Ltxt = ↑1
|S|
|S|
!
i=1
log Dtxt(si|s<i, et),
(2)
where si denotes the ith token in GT token sequence S.
Blurry Video Reconstruction. Finally, the blurry video re-
construction task enables the model to learn the color distri-
bution and capture motion information. We adopt the same
VAE decoder used in the key object segmentation task while
replacing the segmentation head Dvs(·) with a reconstruc-
tion head Dvr(·) Take the video embeddings et as inputs,
the text-driven video decoder with Dvr(·) generates blurry
video yrec
c
→RB→F →C→H
8 →W
8 . Then we map yc to the
latent space of Stable Diffusion’s VAE to obtain the latent
embeddings y↓
c. We adopt mean absolute error (MAE) loss
to train this sub-task, the overall loss can be described as:
Lrec = 1
F
F
!
i=1
|yrec
c,i ↑y↓
c,i|.
(3)
18371


Progressive Learning Strategy and Overall Training
Loss. To dynamically adjust the weights of different loss
functions during training, we propose a logarithmic weight
scheduling strategy. This strategy ensures that the weight of
each loss function follows a smooth curve, starting from 1,
increasing to 10, and then decreasing back to 1 over a prede-
ﬁned period. The weight scheduling is applied to four loss
functions, each with a staggered period to ensure balanced
training. For epoch E, batch B, and batches per epoch NB,
the total batches in a period P is T = P · NB. The cur-
rent batch’s position within the period starting at epoch S
is C = (E ↑S) · NB + B. The weight w is computed
as w = 1 + 9 ·
""sin
# C
T · ω
$"". If E is outside the period
[S, S + P), w = 1. At each batch step, the weights for
all four loss functions are computed using the above for-
mula, with their periods staggered, which ensures smooth
transitions, as shown in Supplementary Fig. b. The overall
training loss can be deﬁned as:
Ltotal = w1Lseg + w2Lcls + w3Ltxt + w4Lrec.
(4)
3.4. Inference: Aggregated Video Reconstruction
Following NeuroClips [10], we use a pre-trained T2V dif-
fusion model [12] for inference, guided by a control im-
age, blurry video, and text description.
As shown in
Fig. 4, we prepare these inputs using outputs from decou-
pled tasks: the control image is generated from a frame via
unCLIP [29], while concepts and text descriptions are de-
rived from Dcls and Dtxt. The top-1 concept and text em-
beddings guide video mask generation via Dvs and blurry
video creation via Dvs, respectively. To emphasize the key
object, we rescale its binary masks to [0.5, 1] and multiply
them to condition both the control image and blurry video,
ensuring its prominence.
4. Experiments
4.1. Experimental Setup
In this study, we performed fMRI-to-video reconstruc-
tion experiments using the open-source fMRI-video dataset
(cc2017 dataset 1 ) [45]. For each subject, the training and
test video clips were presented 2 and 10 times, respectively,
and the test set was averaged across trials. The dataset con-
sists of a training set containing 18 8-minute video clips
and a test set containing 5 8-minute video clips. The MRI
(T1 and T2-weighted) and fMRI data (with 2s temporal
resolution) were collected using a 3-T MRI system. Thus
there are 8640 training samples and 1200 testing samples of
fMRI-video pairs. The data pre-processing follows Neuro-
Clips [10], which is detailed in Supplementary §C. Imple-
mentation details are provided in Supplementary §D.
1 https://purr.purdue.edu/publications/2809/1
Table 1. Quantitative comparison of NEURONS reconstruction per-
formance against other methods (Video-based). Bold font signiﬁes
the best performance, while underlined text indicates the second-
best performance. MinD-Video and NeuroClips are both results
averaged across all three subjects, and the other methods are re-
sults from subject 1. Results of baselines are quoted from [10, 23].
Method
Semantic-level
ST-level
2-way↓
50-way↓
CLIP-pcc↓
Wen [45]
-
0.166±0.02
-
Wang [42]
0.773±0.03
-
0.402±0.41
Kupershmidt [19]
0.771±0.03
-
0.386±0.47
MinD-Video [4]
0.839±0.03
0.197±0.02
0.408±0.46
MindAnimator [23]
0.830±0.03
-
0.428±0.03
NeuroClips [10]
0.834±0.03
0.220±0.01
0.738±0.17
NEURONS
0.863±0.03
0.262±0.01
0.934±0.17
subject 1
0.862±0.02
0.254±0.02
0.932±0.04
subject 2
0.860±0.03
0.252±0.02
0.933±0.04
subject 3
0.868±0.02
0.278±0.02
0.937±0.02
Evaluation Metrics. We conduct the quantitative assess-
ments primarily focusing on video-based metrics. We eval-
uate videos at the semantic level and spatiotemporal(ST)-
level.
For semantic-level metrics, a similar classiﬁca-
tion test (total 400 video classes from the Kinetics-400
dataset [18]) is used above, with a video classiﬁer based
on VideoMAE [38]. For spatiotemporal-level metrics that
measure video consistency, we compute CLIP image em-
beddings on each frame of the predicted videos and report
the average cosine similarity between all pairs of adjacent
video frames, which is the common metric CLIP-pcc in
video editing [46]. Additionally, we assess frames at both
pixel and semantic levels. For pixel-level evaluation, we
use SSIM and PSNR. For semantic-level evaluation, we em-
ploy an N-way top-K accuracy classiﬁcation test (1,000 Im-
ageNet classes). The test compares ground truth (GT) clas-
siﬁcation results with predicted frame (PF) results using an
ImageNet classiﬁer. A trial is successful if the GT class
is among the top-K probabilities (we used top-1) in the PF
results, selected from N random classes, including the GT.
The success rate is based on 100 repeated tests.
4.2. Comparison with State-of-the-Art Methods
In this section, we compare NEURONS with previous video
reconstruction methods on the cc2017 dataset both quanti-
tatively and qualitatively. In quantitative metrics, our pro-
posed method demonstrates superior performance across
all video-based metrics compared to existing methods, as
shown in Table 1. Semantic-level 2-way accuracy achieves
0.863, surpassing the previous best result (0.839 by MinD-
Video) by a relative margin of 2.9%. Notably, our method
signiﬁcantly outperforms state-of-the-art methods in ST-
level CLIP-pcc, attaining 0.934, which represents a 26.6%
18372


GT
Neurons
NeuroClips
GT
Neurons
NeuroClips
Figure 5. Qualitative comparison between NEURONS and previous
SOTA method, NeuroClips [10].
improvement over NeuroClips (0.738). Furthermore, our
method achieves the highest 0.262 in the 50-way accuracy,
outperforming NeuroClips (0.220) by 19.1%.
The con-
sistent superiority across all metrics, coupled with lower
standard deviations, underscores the robustness of our ap-
proach. These results validate that our method effectively
bridges semantic and spatiotemporal feature learning, set-
ting a new benchmark for video understanding tasks. More-
over, we also provided a frame-based comparison, which is
detailed in Supplementary §E.1 and Table a. For qualitative
comparison, as can be seen in Fig. 5, compared to Neuro-
Clips, our NEURONS generates videos with higher quality,
more precise semantics (e.g., people, turtles, and airplanes),
and smoother movements. Furthermore, thanks to the de-
coupled tasks, NEURONS has a better capability of recon-
structing more complex scenes, such as a crowd of people.
More visualizations can be found in Supplementary §E.2.
4.3. Ablation Studies
In this section, we evaluate the key components of NEU-
RONS, including the four decoupled sub-tasks, the progres-
sive learning strategy, and the aggregated video reconstruc-
tion. The quantitative results are in Table 2, where all the re-
sults of the ablation experiments are from subject 1. Due to
the hierarchical function of the proposed methods, we grad-
ually add components starting from the brain model with
Lrec, which is the minimum input requirement of the Neu-
roClips inference pipeline. The results indicate that the in-
clusion of Lseg and Lcls signiﬁcantly improves the model’s
performance, as evidenced by the increase in 2-way and
Table 2. Ablations on the key components of NEURONS on video-
based metrics, and all results are from subject 1. ‘PL’ denotes
the progressive learning strategy and ‘AVR’ stands for aggregated
video reconstruction.
Brain
Key Components
Semantic-level
ST-level
Model
Lseg
Lcls
Ltxt
Lrec
PL
AVR
2-way↓
50-way↓
CLIP-pcc↓
✁
✁
0.814
0.164
0.894
✁
✁
✁
0.834
0.225
0.926
✁
✁
✁
✁
0.836
0.234
0.911
✁
✁
✁
✁
✁
0.847
0.213
0.923
✁
✁
✁
✁
✁
✁
0.856
0.235
0.937
✁
✁
✁
✁
✁
✁
✁
0.862
0.254
0.932
50-way metrics. The addition of Ltxt further enhances the
semantic-level understanding, leading to a notable improve-
ment in the CLIP-pcc score. The progressive learning strat-
egy and aggregated video reconstruction, when combined
with all other components, yield the highest performance
across all metrics, achieving the best 2-way and 50-way
scores of 0.862 and 0.254, respectively. Qualitative anal-
ysis is detailed in Supplementary §E.3.
5. Explicit Evaluation of Decoupled Tasks
Each decoupled task provides certain improvements to the
ﬁnal reconstruction results. In this section, we explicitly
evaluate the outputs of decoupled tasks, i.e., the accuracy of
segmentation, classiﬁcation, and description generation.
Key Object Segmentation. We conducted a comprehen-
sive evaluation of the predicted key object masks. Although
the overall Dice score is relatively low (35.63%), the local-
ization of key objects is often accurate in many cases. The
lower Dice score can be attributed to the presence of nu-
merous out-of-distribution categories in the test set, as high-
lighted in Table b. In Fig. 7, we present several successful
examples where the model achieves precise localization of
the key object. These results demonstrate the model’s abil-
ity to effectively reﬁne the shape and position of objects in
blurry video frames.
Concept Recognition. We evaluated multi-class classiﬁca-
tion accuracy to assess the concept recognition task, ensur-
ing precise and meaningful semantic representations from
the visual cortex. As shown in Table 3, NEURONS achieves
satisfactory accuracy on common categories (0.735 on hu-
man), which indicates the ability of NEURONS to preserve
semantic integrity and prevent conceptual deviations.
Scene Description. NeuroClips [10] generates text prompts
for the T2V diffusion model by captioning the generated
keyframes using BLIP. However, this approach lacks ro-
bustness due to inaccuracies in the generated keyframes,
which often hinder the precise identiﬁcation of semantic
content, as demonstrated in Table 3. We conduct a compre-
hensive comparison between the descriptions generated by
NeuroClips and our method. The results reveal that NEU-
18373


!!"#
!$%!
!&'&
!("$
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
EBA
LOC
V1
V2
PPA
PPA
Figure 6. Mapping decoupled embeddings to the brain map [47] shows consistency with the design ethos in Fig. 1: object segmentation
captures low-level features (V1, V2), concept recognition identiﬁes body parts (EBA), and objects (LOC), scene description processes
scenes (PPA) and higher-level representations, and blurry video reconstruction integrates global but less low-level information.
Figure 7. From left to right, the videos are as follows: the GT
(ground truth) video, the blurry video before and after applying
the segmentation mask condition, the segmentation GT, and the
predicted segmentation masks. Best viewed with Acrobat Reader.
Click the images to play the animation clips.
Table 3. (Top) Evaluation results for concept recognition. Only
the top-5 classes are displayed here, Fullr results in Supplemen-
tary §E.4. (Bottom) Evaluation of scene description at both the
sentence level and verb level.
Concept Recognition Evaluation
Rank
1
2
3
4
5
Class Name
human
food
animal
water body
ﬁsh
Accuracy
0.735
0.600
0.450
0.310
0.292
Scene Description Evaluation
Metric
Sentence-level
Verb Acc
Bleu 1
Bleu 2
Bleu 3
Bleu 4
CIDEr
NeuroClips
0.227
0.096
0.042
0.022
0.156
0.1158
NEURONS
0.238
0.105
0.056
0.036
0.239
0.2425
RONS produces more accurate scene descriptions at the sen-
tence level, particularly in capturing verbs that reﬂect better
motion information. Further details in Supplementary §E.5.
6. Interpretation Results
Inspired by the human visual cortex, we designed our NEU-
RONS with four different decoupled tasks. In order to val-
idate our initial inspiration, we map the projected embed-
dings of each decoupled task to a brain map with [47], a
visualization tool that uncovers functional correlations be-
tween NEURONS’s tasks and distinct regions of the visual
cortex. As shown in Figure 6, the embeddings align with
speciﬁc regions: eseg with V1, V2, and MT (due to video-
based segmentation), ecls with V4, EBA and LOC, etxt with
PPA and FFA. Notably, erec highlights V3 areas while also
encoding richer semantic information. This alignment with
various visual cortex regions validates our design principles
and underscores the biological plausibility of our approach.
More details are in Supplementary §F.
7. Conclusion
We present NEURONS, a novel framework inspired by the
hierarchical organization of the human visual cortex, de-
signed to enhance the ﬁdelity and interpretability of fMRI-
to-video reconstruction. By decomposing the learning pro-
cess into four specialized tasks, we effectively emulate the
functional specialization of the human visual system. This
hierarchical approach enables the framework to capture a
broad spectrum of video content, ranging from low-level
visual features to high-level semantic concepts. Our com-
prehensive experimental results demonstrate that NEURONS
surpasses previous methods across both video-based and
frame-based evaluation metrics. The framework achieves
marked improvements in spatiotemporal consistency, se-
mantic accuracy, and pixel-level reconstruction quality. The
decoupled task structure not only enhances reconstruction
performance but also provides interpretable insights into the
functional alignment between the model and the human vi-
sual cortex. By mapping the outputs of each task to corre-
sponding brain regions, we observed a strong correlation
with the hierarchical processing of visual information in
the human brain, which further highlights its potential for
brain-computer interfaces and clinical applications.
18374


Acknowledgements
This work was supported by a research grant from
the Joint Research Scheme (JRS) under the National
Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) and the
Research Grants Council (RGC) of Hong Kong (Project
No.
N HKUST654/24), as well as a grant from the
Research Grants Council of the Hong Kong Special
Administrative Region, China (Project No.
R6005-24).
References
[1] Guangyin Bao, Zixuan Gong, Qi Zhang, Jialei Zhou, Wei
Fan, Kun Yi, Usman Naseem, Liang Hu, and Duoqian Miao.
Wills aligner: A robust multi-subject brain representation
learner. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.13282, 2024. 2
[2] Andreas Blattmann, Robin Rombach, Huan Ling, Tim Dock-
horn, Seung Wook Kim, Sanja Fidler, and Karsten Kreis.
Align your latents: High-resolution video synthesis with la-
tent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages
22563–22575, 2023. 3
[3] Xinlei Chen, Hao Fang, Tsung-Yi Lin, Ramakrishna Vedan-
tam, Saurabh Gupta, Piotr Doll´ar, and C Lawrence Zitnick.
Microsoft coco captions:
Data collection and evaluation
server. arXiv preprint arXiv:1504.00325, 2015. 3
[4] Zijiao Chen, Jiaxin Qing, and Juan Helen Zhou. Cinematic
mindscapes: High-quality video reconstruction from brain
activity.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems, 36, 2024. 1, 2, 6
[5] Christiane Fellbaum. Wordnet. In Theory and applications of
ontology: computer applications, pages 231–243. Springer,
2010. 3
[6] Matthew F Glasser, Stamatios N Sotiropoulos, J Anthony
Wilson, Timothy S Coalson, Bruce Fischl, Jesper L Anders-
son, Junqian Xu, Saad Jbabdi, Matthew Webster, Jonathan R
Polimeni, et al. The minimal preprocessing pipelines for the
human connectome project. Neuroimage, 80:105–124, 2013.
1
[7] Matthew F Glasser, Timothy S Coalson, Emma C Robinson,
Carl D Hacker, John Harwell, Essa Yacoub, Kamil Ugurbil,
Jesper Andersson, Christian F Beckmann, Mark Jenkinson,
et al. A multi-modal parcellation of human cerebral cortex.
Nature, 536(7615):171–178, 2016. 1
[8] Zixuan Gong, Qi Zhang, Guangyin Bao, Lei Zhu, Ke Liu,
Liang Hu, and Duoqian Miao. Mindtuner: Cross-subject vi-
sual decoding with visual ﬁngerprint and semantic correc-
tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.12630, 2024. 1
[9] Zixuan Gong, Qi Zhang, Guangyin Bao, Lei Zhu, Yu Zhang,
KE LIU, Liang Hu, and Duoqian Miao. Lite-mind: Towards
efﬁcient and robust brain representation learning. In ACM
Multimedia 2024, 2024. 2
[10] Zixuan Gong, Guangyin Bao, Qi Zhang, Zhongwei Wan,
Duoqian Miao, Shoujin Wang, Lei Zhu, Changwei Wang,
Rongtao Xu, Liang Hu, et al. Neuroclips: Towards high-
ﬁdelity and smooth fmri-to-video reconstruction. Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:51655–51683,
2025. 1, 2, 4, 6, 7, 3
[11] Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing
Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair, Aaron Courville, and
Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial networks. Commu-
nications of the ACM, 63(11):139–144, 2020. 2
[12] Yuwei Guo, Ceyuan Yang, Anyi Rao, Yaohui Wang, Yu
Qiao, Dahua Lin, and Bo Dai. Animatediff: Animate your
personalized text-to-image diffusion models without speciﬁc
tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.04725, 2023. 3, 6, 2
[13] Kuan Han, Haiguang Wen, Junxing Shi, Kun-Han Lu,
Yizhen Zhang, Di Fu, and Zhongming Liu. Variational au-
toencoder: An unsupervised model for encoding and decod-
ing fmri activity in visual cortex. NeuroImage, 198:125–136,
2019. 2
[14] Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising dif-
fusion probabilistic models. Advances in neural information
processing systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020. 3
[15] Tomoyasu Horikawa and Yukiyasu Kamitani. Generic de-
coding of seen and imagined objects using hierarchical vi-
sual features. Nature communications, 8(1):15037, 2017. 2
[16] Trevor Huff, Navid Mahabadi, and Prasanna Tadi.
Neu-
roanatomy, visual cortex. StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Is-
land (FL): StatPearls Publishing, 2018. 2
[17] Tilke Judd, Krista Ehinger, Fr´edo Durand, and Antonio Tor-
ralba. Learning to predict where humans look. In 2009 IEEE
12th international conference on computer vision, pages
2106–2113. IEEE, 2009. 2, 5
[18] Will Kay, Joao Carreira, Karen Simonyan, Brian Zhang,
Chloe Hillier, Sudheendra Vijayanarasimhan, Fabio Viola,
Tim Green, Trevor Back, Paul Natsev, et al. The kinetics hu-
man action video dataset. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.06950,
2017. 6
[19] Ganit Kupershmidt, Roman Beliy, Guy Gaziv, and Michal
Irani. A penny for your (visual) thoughts: Self-supervised
reconstruction of natural movies from brain activity. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2206.03544, 2022. 2, 6
[20] Chong Li, Xuelin Qian, Yun Wang, Jingyang Huo, Xi-
angyang Xue, Yanwei Fu, and Jianfeng Feng. Enhancing
cross-subject fmri-to-video decoding with global-local func-
tional alignment. In European Conference on Computer Vi-
sion, pages 353–369. Springer, 2024. 2
[21] Yanmei Liu, Jiahe Zhang, Zhishan Jiang, Meiling Qin, Min
Xu, Siyu Zhang, and Guofen Ma. Organization of cortico-
cortical and thalamocortical top-down inputs in the primary
visual cortex. Nature Communications, 15(1):4495, 2024. 2
[22] Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay
regularization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.05101, 2017. 2
[23] Yizhuo Lu, Changde Du, Chong Wang, Xuanliu Zhu, Liuyun
Jiang, and Huiguang He. Animate your thoughts: Decoupled
reconstruction of dynamic natural vision from slow brain ac-
tivity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.03280, 2024. 6
[24] Weijian Mai and Zhijun Zhang.
Unibrain: Unify image
reconstruction and captioning all in one diffusion model
from human brain activity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.07428,
2023. 2
[25] A David Milner. How do the two visual streams interact with
each other? Experimental brain research, 235:1297–1308,
2017. 2
18375


[26] Shinji Nishimoto, An T Vu, Thomas Naselaris, Yuval Ben-
jamini, Bin Yu, and Jack L Gallant. Reconstructing visual
experiences from brain activity evoked by natural movies.
Current biology, 21(19):1641–1646, 2011. 1, 2
[27] Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario
Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language models are unsu-
pervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019. 5
[28] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya
Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sastry,
Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning
transferable visual models from natural language supervi-
sion. In International conference on machine learning, pages
8748–8763. PMLR, 2021. 1, 2
[29] Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu,
and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-conditional image gener-
ation with clip latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125, 1
(2):3, 2022. 3, 6
[30] Tianhe Ren, Shilong Liu, Ailing Zeng, Jing Lin, Kunchang
Li, He Cao, Jiayu Chen, Xinyu Huang, Yukang Chen, Feng
Yan, et al. Grounded sam: Assembling open-world models
for diverse visual tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.14159,
2024. 3
[31] Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz,
Patrick Esser, and Bj¨orn Ommer.
High-resolution image
synthesis with latent diffusion models.
In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, pages 10684–10695, 2022. 2
[32] Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz,
Patrick Esser, and Bj¨orn Ommer.
High-resolution image
synthesis with latent diffusion models.
In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, pages 10684–10695, 2022. 1, 2, 3
[33] Paul Scotti, Atmadeep Banerjee, Jimmie Goode, Stepan Sha-
balin, Alex Nguyen, Aidan Dempster, Nathalie Verlinde,
Elad Yundler, David Weisberg, Kenneth Norman, et al. Re-
constructing the mind’s eye: fmri-to-image with contrastive
learning and diffusion priors. Advances in Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems, 36, 2024. 1
[34] Paul S Scotti, Mihir Tripathy, Cesar Kadir Torrico Vil-
lanueva, Reese Kneeland, Tong Chen, Ashutosh Narang,
Charan Santhirasegaran, Jonathan Xu, Thomas Naselaris,
Kenneth A Norman, et al. Mindeye2: Shared-subject mod-
els enable fmri-to-image with 1 hour of data. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2403.11207, 2024. 1, 4
[35] Leslie N Smith and Nicholay Topin.
Super-convergence:
Very fast training of neural networks using large learn-
ing rates.
In Artiﬁcial intelligence and machine learning
for multi-domain operations applications, pages 369–386.
SPIE, 2019. 2
[36] Jiaming
Song,
Chenlin
Meng,
and
Stefano
Ermon.
Denoising diffusion implicit models.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2010.02502, 2020. 2
[37] Yu Takagi and Shinji Nishimoto. High-resolution image re-
construction with latent diffusion models from human brain
activity.
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 14453–
14463, 2023. 2
[38] Zhan Tong, Yibing Song, Jue Wang, and Limin Wang.
Videomae: Masked autoencoders are data-efﬁcient learners
for self-supervised video pre-training. Advances in neural
information processing systems, 35:10078–10093, 2022. 6
[39] Aaron Van Den Oord, Oriol Vinyals, et al. Neural discrete
representation learning. Advances in neural information pro-
cessing systems, 30, 2017. 3
[40] Patrick von Platen, Suraj Patil, Anton Lozhkov, Pedro
Cuenca, Nathan Lambert, Kashif Rasul, Mishig Davaadorj,
Dhruv Nair, Sayak Paul, William Berman, Yiyi Xu, Steven
Liu, and Thomas Wolf.
Diffusers: State-of-the-art diffu-
sion models. https://github.com/huggingface/
diffusers, 2022. 5
[41] Chong Wang, Hongmei Yan, Wei Huang, Jiyi Li, Yuting
Wang, Yun-Shuang Fan, Wei Sheng, Tao Liu, Rong Li, and
Huafu Chen. Reconstructing rapid natural vision with fmri-
conditional video generative adversarial network. Cerebral
Cortex, 32(20):4502–4511, 2022. 2
[42] Chong Wang, Hongmei Yan, Wei Huang, Jiyi Li, Yuting
Wang, Yun-Shuang Fan, Wei Sheng, Tao Liu, Rong Li, and
Huafu Chen. Reconstructing rapid natural vision with fmri-
conditional video generative adversarial network. Cerebral
Cortex, 32(20):4502–4511, 2022. 2, 6
[43] Peng Wang, Shuai Bai, Sinan Tan, Shijie Wang, Zhihao Fan,
Jinze Bai, Keqin Chen, Xuejing Liu, Jialin Wang, Wenbin
Ge, et al. Qwen2-vl: Enhancing vision-language model’s
perception of the world at any resolution.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2409.12191, 2024. 3
[44] Tianye Wang, Tai Sing Lee, Haoxuan Yao, Jiayi Hong, Yang
Li, Hongfei Jiang, Ian Max Andolina, and Shiming Tang.
Large-scale calcium imaging reveals a systematic v4 map
for encoding natural scenes. Nature Communications, 15(1):
6401, 2024. 2
[45] Haiguang Wen, Junxing Shi, Yizhen Zhang, Kun-Han Lu, Ji-
ayue Cao, and Zhongming Liu. Neural encoding and decod-
ing with deep learning for dynamic natural vision. Cerebral
cortex, 28(12):4136–4160, 2018. 2, 6, 1
[46] Jay Zhangjie Wu, Xiuyu Li, Difei Gao, Zhen Dong, Jin-
bin Bai, Aishani Singh, Xiaoyu Xiang, Youzeng Li, Zuwei
Huang, Yuanxi Sun, et al. Cvpr 2023 text guided video edit-
ing competition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.16003, 2023. 6
[47] Huzheng Yang, James Gee, and Jianbo Shi. Brain decodes
deep nets.
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 23030–
23040, 2024. 8, 4
18376
