Title: Functional brain organization is stable within individuals across years

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.64898/2026.06.10.731401v2.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 53

Markdown Content:
1

TITLE : Functional brain organization is stable within individuals across years 

AUTHORS : Hyejin J. Lee* 1,2,3 , Ally Dworetsky* 4,3,5 , Alexis Porter 5, Sihan Fei 5, Ashley 

N. Nielsen 6, Benjamin A. Seitzman 7, Babatunde Adeyemo 8,6,9 , Patrick G. Bissett 10 ,

Russell A. Poldrack 10 , Jessica R. Cohen 11 , Mark D’Esposito 12 , Maital Neta 13 ,14 , Nico 

U. F. Dosenbach 6,1 5,1 6,1 7,1 8,1 9, Steven E. Petersen 4,6,9,1 6,1 7, Evan M. Gordon 15,20 ,

Deanna J. Greene 21, Caterina Gratton 1,2,3,5,2 2,2 3,2 4,2 5

AFFILIATIONS :

Beckman Institute, University of Illinois Urbana –Champaign 1

Department of Psychology, University of Illinois Urbana –Champaign 2

Department of Psychology, Florida State University 3

Department of Radiology, Washington University School of Medicine 4

Department of Psychology, Northwestern University 5

Department of Neurology, Washington University School of Medicine 6

Department of Radiation Oncology, Washington University School of Medicine 7

Department of Psychiatry, Washington University School of Medicine 8

Department of Neuroscience, Washington University School of Medicine 9

Department of Psychology, Stanford University 10 

Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, University of North Carolina at Chapel 

Hill 11 

Department of Psychology, University of California Berkeley 12 

Department of Psychology,  University of Nebraska –Lincoln 13 

Center for Brain, Biology, and Behavior, University of Nebraska –Lincoln 14

Mallinckrodt Institute of Radiology, Washington University School of Medicine 15

Department of Psychological & Brain Sciences, Washington University in Saint 

Louis 16

Department of Biomedical Engineering, Washington University in Saint Louis 17

Program in Occupational Therapy, Washington University in Saint Louis 18

Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine 19

Allied Labs for Imaging Guided Neurotherapies (ALIGN), Washington University 

School of Medicine 20 

Department of Cognitive Science, University of California San Diego 21

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.10.731401 doi: bioRxiv preprint

2

Neuroscience Program, University of Illinois Urbana –Champaign 22

Neuroscience Program, Florida State University 23

Department of Neurology, Northwestern University 24

Interdepartmental Neuroscience Program, Northwestern University 25

* These authors contributed equally to this work and should be listed as co -first. 

CORRESPONDENCE :

Caterina Gratton  cgratton@illinois.edu 

Hyejin J. Lee  leex6248@gmail.com 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS :

This work was supported by NIH R01MH118370 (CG) and R01NS124738 (CG). 

Data for this work were stored and analyzed using HPC resources at the Research 

Computing Center at Florida State University, computational resources provided for 

the Quest high performa nce computing facility at Northwestern University, and the 

Illinois Campus Cluster, operated by the Illinois Campus Cluster Program (ICCP) in 

collaboration with the National Center for Supercomputing Applications (NCSA), with 

support from the University of  Illinois Urbana -Champaign. We would like to thank 

Sunjae Shim and Jaime Rios for assistance with scanning in the MyConnectome 

follow -up study. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.10.731401 doi: bioRxiv preprint

3

ABSTRACT 

Brain  regions  exhibit  dynamic  yet  highly coordinated activity  patterns  that form  large -

scale functional networks measur able through  rest ing -state correlations . While their 

association with fluctuating activity may intuitively suggest functional networks to be 

temporally transient and dependent on state, a growing body of literature suggests 

that  they  are person -specific and stable across days.  If  truly person -specific, then 

functional networks should  preserve unique characteristics over extended periods. 

To  test  this  hypothesis , we collected  longitudinal  precision  fMRI data  (≥ 60 minutes 

per participant per time point ) from  10  healthy young adults  across 1 -3 year intervals ,

as well as  three  adults  over  8-13 year s.  We further  replicated  findings  in the 

MyConnectome dataset and its 10 -year follow -up.  Functional network organization —

when sufficient per -participant data  were  collected — remained largely stable  within 

individuals  over prolonged periods  of  up to 13 years , suggesting  that  individualized 

brain organization constitutes persistent features of  personal identity  that may be 

supported by homeostatic mechanisms .

SIGNIFICANCE 

While  many aspects of brain function are  portrayed a s dynamic  and  malleable , our 

study  provides evidence for  the long -term preservation of functional  organization  of 

the  healthy young  adult  brain . Whole -brain  functional  organization  exhibit ed  unique 

individual characteristics  that  we re preserved  for years,  even over a decade . The 

stability of such individualized neural  architecture  suggests that the brain encodes 

features of personhood that  may be  invariant across contexts and temporal 

fluctuations.  This observation reframe s our understanding of brain resilience and 

plasticity  by  offering new insights into the extent  th at homeostatic mechanisms of 

brain organization can  withstand stressors and environmental changes through time 

to maintain a constant functional organization . These insights pave the way for a 

more comprehensive understanding of the neural mechanisms behind  this  stability ,

with the possibility of  pinpoint ing  critical markers of healthy  brain function and its 

disruptions .

Keywords : brain network s, longitudinal,  precision,  fMRI,  homeostasis 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.10.731401 doi: bioRxiv preprint

4

INTRODUCTION 

Many aspects of brain function are portrayed as fluctuating, dynamic, and malleable 

depending on  internal states and environmental demands . Yet,  people  are typically 

stable in their cognitive abilities and behavioral profiles  across adulthood  (Costa, 

1986; Graham et al., 2020; Schaie et al., 2004) , contributing to a person’s sense of 

stable identity. A fundamental question is wh at aspects of brain function  persist 

similarly unchanged, supporting  stable, trait -like aspects of personhood. 

Recent advances  in  fMRI have made it possible to examine  functional  organization 

in the human brain  in vivo in a replicable manner  (Power et al., 2011; Thomas Yeo et 

al., 2011) . A  characteristic  aspect  of this organization is the presence of  distinct, 

large -scale systems, or  intrinsic  ‘functional  networks ’, of brain areas  that show 

correlated  activity, even while a person i s at  rest  (Biswal et al., 1995; Damoiseaux et 

al., 2006; Fox & Raichle, 2007; Smith et al., 2009) . Although  there are general 

principles shared across all brains, these investigations have highlighted that no two 

brains mirror each other’s functional architecture  (Finn et al., 2015; Miranda -

Dominguez et al., 2014) : significant inter -individual variability exists, giving rise to 

unique, idiosyncratic features in  functional  networks  (Dworetsky et al., 2024; Gordon 

et al., 2017; Seitzman et al., 2019) . These i ndividual  characteristics  can predict 

variation  in  behavior  and cognition  among individuals  (Bijsterbosch et al., 2018; Finn 

et al., 2015; Kong et al., 2019, 2021; Lee et al., 2025; Pierce et al., 2024) ,

suggesting functional networks may encode person -specific traits .

A fundamental question raised by these results is whether functional networks 

remain stable across adulthood, even over extended periods marked by stressors 

and environmental changes.  This pattern would support the idea that homeostatic 

mechanisms maintain functional network integrity  (Laumann & Snyder, 2021)  and, in 

turn, core phenotypic characteristics.  One  theoretical account  proposes  that  inter -

regional  correlations in brain activity  reflect  cumulative history  of  brain activity 

accrued over an individual ’s lifetime  (Petersen & Sporns, 2015) . Within this 

framework, h omeostatic mechanisms may act to pr eserve  functional network 

integrity  despite ongoing  context -driven neural  fluctuations  (Laumann & Snyder, 

2021) . This perspective argues that  individual -specific  functional organization should 

be stable across different mental states  and over prolonged periods  within 

individuals , thereby preserving individual identity . Consistent with this, p rior work has 

demonstrated that functional network  organization  remain s largely  stable  within 

individuals over days and weeks  (Gordon et al., 2017; Laumann et al., 2015; 

Seitzman et al., 2019) , including in the face of changing  cognitive  demands  (Du et 

al., 2025a; Gratton et al., 2018) .

However, i t is not known how extensively  the  statistical history  of functional brain 

activity  might be altered  across extended timescale s, such as  periods over a decade .

Over these time windows, adults accrue changes in life experiences, stressors, and 

environmental  input —yet  their sense of identity remain s intact.  Extended longitudinal 

data may help to disambiguate between competing models for functional brain 

organization: whether it is shaped primarily by recent experiences  or preserved to 

reflect trait -like features of personhood  through homeostatic mechanisms . Although 

some  research  has  suggested that at least a subset of large -scale brain networks 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.10.731401 doi: bioRxiv preprint

5

can  show some degree of individual identifiability  over  1-3 years  (Badhwar et al., 

2020; Horien et al., 2019; Jalbrzikowski et al., 2020) , o thers have highlighted 

dynamic variation in brain networks even  within  a single scan session  (Albert et al., 

2009; Allen et al., 2014; Dhond et al., 2008; Lurie et al., 2020; Sami & Miall, 2013) .

Resolving  th is  uncertaint y requires  high quality , longitudinal  measures  of functional 

brain organization  at the individual level . Pr ior  longitudinal studie s often  face d two 

ma jor  limitations.  One is  limited individual data —often less than 10 minutes per time 

point —where sampling variability critically constrains the reliability of fMRI measures 

(Elliott et al., 2019, 2020; Gordon et al., 2017; Laumann et al., 2015; Noble et al., 

2017) . The other is  limited time spans of 1 -3 years,  not well matched to the expected 

windows of life experience change in adulthood . To address th ese  limitations , o ur 

study employ ed  high -quality, densely sampled data for each participant ( ≥60  minutes 

collected  per time point) across a broad time range (1 -13 years)  to map individual 

network topography  with high precision . We replicated o ur  findings  with  the 

MyConnectome  dataset, a n extensively sampled , single -participant  data set originally 

released in 2014  (Laumann et al., 2015; Poldrack et al., 2015) , and  recently 

expanded with  the  addition  of  longitudinal data collected  a decade  later .

RESULTS 

We track ed  precise measures of brain organization in the same individuals  across  an 

extended time interval: two  participants were tracked  across an interval of 13 years 

and one across an interval of 8 years ( Prolonged Longitudinal Cohort ; see  Fig . 1

for a summary of data collection ).  This cohort underwent significant life transitions, 

including childbirth, parenting, career changes, relocation across the country , loss of 

a parent , and  pandemic lockdown s. We additionally acquired data from  10 

individuals scanned across shorter intervals  of 1 -3 years  with an identical scanning 

protocol  (Standard Longitudinal Cohort ). Our initial analyses focused on the 

Prolonged Cohort to evaluate the stability of network measures over extended 

periods. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.10.731401 doi: bioRxiv preprint

6

Fig ure.  1.  Data s ummary.  We collected d ata from  10  individual s (iLong01 -10 ; mean 

age of 26  years  at the time of first scanning ) and grouped into two cohorts, based on 

scan intervals and condition matching ( prolonged  and unmatched versus s tandard 

and matched). The Prolonged Cohort had extended intervals of 13 (iLong01  and 

iLong 02 ) or 8 years (iLong03), with initial scans  conducted  at University of California, 

Berkeley (iLong01 and iLong 02 ) and  Washington University in Saint Louis (iLong03). 

The MyConnectome data set  (4 5 years old ) and its follow -up  we re included  as 

replication data  (iLong11)  to the Prolonged Cohort ; here time  point  1 was collected at 

the University of Texas at Austin, and time  point  2 at Stanford University, 10 years 

later . The Standard Cohort had shorter intervals between scans of 1 -3 years, with all 

scans performed at Northwestern University using a consistent protocol.  More details 

on data acquisition can be found in the  Methods  section. 

1.1  Functional organization  exhibit s within -individual  stability over a decade -

long period 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.10.731401 doi: bioRxiv preprint

7

In the  three  Prolonged  participants , the  organization of functional brain networks ,

individually  mapped  at  each  time point , was  largely  stable  over  extended  periods 

(Fig.  2a). Consistent with prior research  (Gordon et al., 2017) , brain network 

topography was unique in each  participant  (compar ing  each participant ’s first time 

point with the group average in  Fig . 2a). Notably, within each participant,  functional 

network topography was  largely  stable over  8-13  years. Most vertices  (locations on 

the cortical surface)  were  assigned  to  the same network at both time points  (7 9% for 

iLong01  and iLong 02 , and  83% for iLong03 ), significantly  exceed ing  the null 

distribution derived from  the  between -participant  comparisons  (M = 64%,  SD  = 1. 65 ;

permutation  p < 0.001 ; analyses  conducted  after excluding low -SNR regions) . These 

results were replicated in the  MyConnectome dataset  and  accompanying  longitudinal 

data collected 10 years later  (75% consistency across time  points;  Fig. 2 a, bottom 

row) . Notably,  in all four participants,  even  small,  idiosyncratic network  regions 

(Dworetsky et al., 2024) —unique to each participant and not observed in the group 

average —remained consistent over time . W e highlight examples  within the lateral 

prefrontal area  (Fig.  2a, right  zoom -in ) where  some of  the largest individual 

variability in network topography  has been  observed  (Ladwig et al., 2026) .

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.10.731401 doi: bioRxiv preprint

8

Figure  2. Individual -specific  functional  brain  organization  is  stable over 

prolonged periods.  a) Network  maps  show high  temporal  consensus.  Large -

scale  functional  networks at each time point  are shown with  colors indicat ing  14 

distinct networks. Results are shown separately for each of  the  Prolonged 

Longitudinal  Cohort (rows) in chronological order. The  final  consensus map shows 

color -coded vertices assigned to the same network across both time points 

(inconsistent vertices are shown in gray).  Results show  high consensus  in all  three 

participants , as well as in the replication dataset . A zoom -in highlights the 

consistency of individual specific regions in the lateral prefrontal cortex.  b)

Continuous seed map s replicate  high  temporal stability.  Each vertex is colored 

by the similarity ( Pearson ’s r) of  functional connectivity seed maps for each vertex 

between  prolonged  time points.  High  consistency is seen  within the same participant 

over time  (diagonal spaces), wh ereas  the  similarity  between participants w as  notably 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.10.731401 doi: bioRxiv preprint

9

lower.  This pattern was  consistent  in the  replication  dataset (last row/column).  c)

Within -participant stability significantly exceeds between -participant 

variability.  The average of the whole -brain maps  presented  in  panel  b with l ow -SNR 

regions censored. Red dots represent the average  similarity ( r) across time points 

within participants,  which were significantly higher than the between -participant 

correlations shown in black .

To provide a more detailed picture,  whole -brain  functional connectivity  profiles  for 

each vertex  were co mpar ed across time  points  (Fig.  2b). Again, the results showed 

robust within -participant stability ; the average spatial correlation across the whole 

cortex , calculated across  the  three  Prolonged  participants, was  r = 0 .7 5 (SD  = 0.0 7), 

which was significantly higher than the  functional connectivity  similarity between 

participants ( r = 0.4 5, SD  = 0.03 ) with permutation testing,  p < 0.001  (Fig.  2c).  This 

pattern  was  consistently observed  in  the  replication  dataset  (across time  point s,  r =

0. 69). Regions with  relatively lower stability primarily fell into areas of lower signal 

quality (e.g., inferior temporal and orbitofrontal;  (Ojemann et al., 1997a) ) or regions 

known to be more susceptible to arousal -related effects (visual and motor;  (Laumann 

et al., 2015; Tagliazucchi & Laufs, 2014) ).  Note that  this level of stability was 

achieved despite the fact that  scanners and scan sequence parameters were not 

matched across time  points . A s such, consistency across these datasets should be 

considered a lower bound of the similarity that functional brain organization can 

achieve across these timescales. 

1.2  Controlled scanner conditions  show  comparable  stability across  weekly 

and  yearly  timescales 

We subsequently conducted systematic investigation  of longitudinal changes  in  10 

participants ( Standard Longitudinal Cohort ) with data collected on the  same 

scanner  with the same  scan parameters o ver  1-3 years  (see  Methods ). Critically,  this 

dataset features multiple sessions  at each of  2-3 time  point s, allowing for a 

comparison between the amount of day -to -day variability  between  sessions  relative 

to variability across years. 

Results showed  remarkable stability  in  functional  network organization . Across  10 

participants , 87% of vertices  (SD  = 3.91 ) we re assigned to the same network across 

all  longitudinal  time points  (Fig.  3a). This  degree of network  consistency  was  largely 

stable across temporal scales  (Fig . 3b, based on  match ed  data  quantit ies) , with 

similarity  both  for sessions separated by weeks  (M = 82%, SD  = 2.93 ) and  years  (M

= 81% , SD  = 3. 37 ) significantly exceed ing  between -participant similarity ( black;  M =

61%,  SD  = 1.65 ), p = 0.002 (group -level  permutation  testing via label shuffling) .

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.10.731401 doi: bioRxiv preprint

10 

Figure  3. Controlled measurements reveal  strong  stability of functional 

network organization.  a) High  network consensus with preserved  idiosyncratic 

features.  We mapped  functional  network s at the individual level  and colored the 

vertices when the same network was assigned across  all  two  or  three  time points in 

the Standard  Longitudinal  Cohort  (as in  Fig.  2a; time delay shown under each brain) .

With controlled measurements, m ost vertices were consistent  over time . The 

zoomed -in view shows  idiosyncratic locations in the  lateral prefrontal  cortex , which 

vary across p articipants  but  appear consistently  within participants  across time 

points.  See  Supp. Fig.  1 for the  full  timeline and  brain  maps.  b) Within -participant 

similarity  remains high across same and different  time points  relative to 

between -participant comparisons . As expected, while similarity was greatest 

across weeks  (same time point; gray dots) , similarity across years  (different time 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.10.731401 doi: bioRxiv preprint

11 

points; red dots) also  remained high and was significantly greater than between -

participant  stability (black dots) . The data  quantity  was matched (30 minutes per 

session), and low -SNR  vertice s were censored. 

As before, we  also  examined the similarity in continuous maps of  vertex -wise 

functional connectivity  pattern  (Fig. 4 ), without enforcing a hard network parcellation 

(as in  Fig . 3a). Similarity across time points  was high  throughout the cortex  (Fig. 4 a),

with  a participant  group  mean  of  r = 0. 91  (SD  = 0.03 , excluding low -SNR regions ).

Comparisons with  matched  data  across participants (86 minutes  per time point ; Fig. 

4a matrix ) confirmed  that  the  within -participant similarity  (r = 0.8 8, SD  = 0.0 2) wa s

almost double  the  between -participant  similarity  (r = 0.4 8, SD  = 0.04 ; permutation 

test , p < 0.001 ). Likewise , comparisons across sessions ( 30 minutes per  session ,

separated across weeks or years;  Fig. 4 b) confirmed that within -participant 

correlations  (M = 0.77,  SD  = 0.05 ) remained consistently high, whereas between -

participant correlations  (M = 0.4 , SD  = 0.04 ) were significantly lower,  p < 0.001, 

recapitulating the pattern observed across yearly time points. 

Figure  4. Robust within -participant stability  in functional connectivity  for  both 

yearly and weekly data . a) Stability across  yearly  time points.  The spatial 

distribution of functional connectivity similarity across the brain in the  10  Standard 

Cohort participants.  For  each  participant,  functional connectivity seed maps between 

the longest intervals  (1 -3 years)  were compared  for each vertex . The results show ed 

high spatial correlations,  r > 0.8  for most  throughout the brain.  The cent ral  matrix 

shows  within -participant comparisons along the diagonal, which  we re significantly 

higher than the off -dia gonal between -participant  comparison s.  The matrix v alues 

represent  average spatial correlation across the  cortical  surface after censoring low -

SNR regions.  b) Stability across sessions.  The  session -level  correlations  we re 

highly stable  both  within  (weekly)  and across  (yearly)  time points but differ ed 

substantially  across participants ; note that  the correlations  were  comparable  within 

participants ( denoted by  the thickest black lines)  across  different time points (next 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.10.731401 doi: bioRxiv preprint

12 

thickest black lines) , as  reflected by the warm color gradients  along the diagonal, 

consistent with the matrix in  panel  a.

Consistent  results were seen with regional analyses done in the cortical volume 

instead of  on  the cortical surface  to ensure that findings are robust  irrespective  of 

analysis framework  (Supp . Fig . 2). Th ese results  recapitulate  that  in young adults, 

functional  correlation patterns are  relatively stable across years, with yearly 

variability  only subtly  exceeding variability explained by measurement noise and 

daily  fluctuation .

To  more  systematically  assess the influence of elapsed time on functional 

connectivity similarity , we  formally modeled  inter -session similarity as a function of 

elapsed time between sessions (days),  signal quality ( BOLD  tSNR ),  data quantity 

(frames remaining after motion censoring) , and participant baseline , using a linear 

fixed effects model for each region ( Seitzman300 atlas ). Based on  the  observations 

above , we hypothesized that elapsed time would  account for only a small proportion 

of variance.  Global variance partitioning ( Supp.  Fig.  3a) revealed  that the modeled 

factors  accounted for approximately  30%  of the variance  in functional connectivity 

similarity across sessions . This relatively low  proportion  of  explained  variance is 

attributable to  high  baseline functional connectivity  similarity  in most  regions , as 

indicated by the high  mean intercept  of  0. 9 (Supp.  Fig.  3b ).  Within the  explainable 

portion of  the  variance,  participant  baseline  was the dominant contributor  (24.75 %),

indicating i nter -individual differences in baseline similarity , whereas e lapsed time 

(2.58 %), BOLD  signal  quality ( 0.54% ) and data quantity ( 1.55% ) accounted for  only 

small fraction s (note however that data quantity was large and relatively similar 

across these datasets) . Thus, differences in elapsed time (weeks to years) had only 

a small (2.6%) effect on similarity among functional network maps. 

1.3  Precise  estimates of longitudinal stability require sufficient within -

participant data 

Sampling variability arises from limited amounts of  fMRI  data, leading to fluctuations 

that do not reflect true neural changes.  To demonstrate the  significance  of reducing 

sampling variability in longitudinal  assessment , we compared functional connectivity 

derived from high - and low -sampling regimes.  We compared functional network 

similarity derived from  precision fMRI data (30 minutes per session) relative to more 

conventional non -precision data collection protocols  where sampling variability is 

high ( matched  10  minutes  of low -motion data ; Fig.  5). Our  findings  of robust stability 

across sessions  were  stronger  with high precision sampling ( within -participant 

similarity across sessions of  r = 0.7 7) than  with smaller amounts of data  (within -

participant similarity  of  r = 0. 62) , as  sampling variability significantly weaken ed  the 

similarity across sessions , p < 0.001 (permutation testing) . This highlights th e added 

consistency in  individual  brain network measures that can be achieved with 

extended multi -session scanning, relative to more standard protocols. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.10.731401 doi: bioRxiv preprint

13 

Figure  5. Extended per -participant scanning reveals robust temporal stability. 

a) We compared f unctional connectivity  (FC)  between cortical regions of interest 

(Seitzman300) . Each cell of the matrix represents the similarity of  FC  between pairs 

of sessions  (data amount matched to 30 minutes per session) . The matrix shows 

high correlations within participants (indicated by warmer colors along the diagonal) 

and low correlations between participants (cooler colors), supporting that  FC  is 

individual -specific. Additionally, there  we re notable high correlations between time 

points within participants, as indicated by the similarity of colors across time points 

for each participant.  b) In  contrast to the left panel , th is  matrix  was  generated  using 

the first  10  minutes  of data  after censoring high -motion  frames , which is  often  the 

case  in many consortium resting -state fMRI datasets . Correlations within participants 

were still notably higher than those between participants, but the  mean within -

participant similarity  was  significantly  smaller  than the left . Sufficient per -participant 

data —more than 30 minutes  per session —would likely be needed to demonstrate 

that temporal stability can reach levels above 0.7 5.

1.4. Hi erarchical network organization of functional stability 

The v ertex -level analyses  (Figs.  2-4) showed that the majority of vertices and large -

scale networks  exhibited  temporal  stability. However,  relatively lower stability  was 

observed  within s ensori motor and visual areas.  To quantify  whether  specific 

networks differed in their longitudinal changes , we ranked  networks  from highest to 

lowest stability  on average across  the Standard Cohort  participants  (Fig. 6 a). When 

stability estimates were averaged across networks within each category,  association 

networks ( default mode ( DMN ), frontoparietal ( FP ), cingulo -opercular  action -mode 

(CO /AMN ), dorsal  attention ( DAN), and salience (SAL) ) showed significantly greater 

temporal stability  than  sensorimotor networks ( visual (Vis), auditory (Aud), 

somatomotor  ventral  (SMv ), and  somatomotor  dorsal  (SMd ); paired  t-test,  t(9) = 

4.85 , p < 0.001, Cohen ’s d = 1.5 3; Fig. 6 b).  Note that although medial temporal  lobe 

(MTL)  and temporal pole  (Tpole)  are also  association  networks, they mostly overlap 

with low SNR regions  and were thus considered separately (gray bars in  Fig.  6a).

Th is  ranking w as  highly similar to the ranking of  network  similarity  of  the Prolonged 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.10.731401 doi: bioRxiv preprint

14 

Longitudinal  Cohort ( Supp. Fig. 4 ). 

We next asked whether the pattern of functional network changes across years 

exceeded the amount expected from daily variability. To this end, w e compared long -

term  divergence  (1 - functional connectivity  similarity  across years) to short -term 

variability ( 1 - functional connectivity  similarity  across weeks ; Fig.  6c).  Across 

networks,  the se  drift ratios were generally close to  1, with a modest tendency to 

exceed it , indicat ing  that yearly and  weekly  variability  are  close to equivalent  across 

networks with slightly larger changes seen across years . While generally similar, the 

largest yearly drift  ratios  were seen for sensor imotor networks, while the most 

stability was seen in association networks.  In summary, all networks exhibited  a

profile of  relatively  high stability  across years  with only subtle accumulating drift 

across years , while  the highest yearly stability was found in association networks .

Figure  6. Identifying  functional  networks that are more  stable  across years . a)

Network stability r ank ordering of the Standard Longitudinal Cohort.  The circles 

indicate the mean  functional  connectivity similarity for each network across 

participants with the solid lines showing its 95% confidence interval  (individual points 

are from each participant) . The means were ranked from most stable to least stable. 

b) Compar ing  mean stability  between  association  and  sensorimotor networks 

show ed  that  association networks  exhibited  significantly  greater temporal stability 

(each dot  indicates  one Standard Cohort participant).  c) For each network, functional 

connectivity  similarity was computed across sessions within the same time point 

(weekly stability) and across longitudinal time points (yearly stability).  We computed 

a drift ratio (1 -yearly similarity)/(1 -daily similarity). Values near  1 indicate comparable 

divergence across timescales, whereas ratios >1 indicate greater  long -term drift 

relative to short -term session variability.  On average, networks show a drift ratio 

close to, but slightly exceeding  1, indicating subtle accumulating  yearly  drift in brain 

networks. This pattern was stronger in sensorimotor than association networks. 

(DMN, default mode network; FP,  frontoparietal network ; CO /AMN , cingulo -opercular 

action -mode  network ; DAN, dorsal attention network; PON,  parieto -occipital  network ;

LAN G, language network; PMN,  medial parietal  network ; Vis, visual  network ; SMv, 

somatomotor ventral; SMd, somatomotor dorsal; Sal, salience  network ; Aud, auditory 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.10.731401 doi: bioRxiv preprint

15 

network ; Tpole, temporal pole; MTL, medial temporal lobe) 

1. 5 Idiosyncratic n etwork  variants show  longitudinal stabilit y

While we have found that brain networks , as a whole , are  longitudinally  stable,  we 

further assessed  the  stability of locations with  the  most  person -specific features. 

Network variants are  locations  where an individual’s functional connectivity patterns 

differ  the most  from the group average  (Seitzman et al., 2019) . In past work, we  have 

demonstrated that these locations are  reliable across sessions  over approximately a 

month  (Dworetsky et al., 2024; Seitzman et al., 2019) . Here we  further  examined 

how consistent these locations  are over years , during which substantial neural and 

environmental changes accumulate , in order  to examine the extent to which  brain 

network  variant s could function as trait -like biological markers .

Consistent  with our other measures,  network variants  within individuals 

demonstrated stability  over  time ( Fig.  7). In the  three  Prolonged Cohort participants 

(prolonged years highlighted in pink) , the within -participant Dice coefficient of the 

variants ( M = 0.5 1, SD  = 0.1 3) was significantly higher than the between -participant 

Dice coefficient  (M = 0.1 8, SD  = 0.02 ),  p < 0.001  (permutation  test ing via label 

shuffling ). This finding was replicated in the  My Connectome data set  and its 10 -year 

follow -up  (Dice = 0.5;  see  Supp. Fig.  5 for the full timeline and  brain  maps). 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.10.731401 doi: bioRxiv preprint

16 

Figure  7. Idiosyncratic n etwork variants overlap across time.  Network variants 

were mapped for each participant at each time point.  In line  with prior  studies , the 

location , topography, and size  of variants  var ied  across participants,  consistent with 

their characterization as  idiosyncratic features  (Dworetsky et al., 2024; Seitzman et 

al., 2019) . Notably, variant s show ed  high overlap between time points within 

participants  (marked in yellow) , even  across  time  spans  of more than a decade . See 

also  Supp. Fig.  7 for the unthresholded  variant  maps and  Supp. Fig.  8 for the 

detailed composition of these overlapping variants,  illustrating  the  network affiliation 

of  each vertex. 

The consensus was  also  notable in the Standard Cohort, with a mean Dice 

coefficient of  0.76  (SD  = 0.05 ).  When compared at a session -level (with matched, but 

more limited data  of 30 minutes per session ), we f ou nd that network variants 

overlapped similarly across  yearly  (Dice  M = 0.58) and w eekly  timescales  (Dice  M =

0.60),  where  yearly comparisons significantly exceeded  comparisons between 

participants ( Dice  M = 0.1 6; permutation  p = 0.0 02; see  Supp. Fig.  6). These 

findings  confirm  that  even  the most  idiosyncratic  features of  functional brain 

organization are  largely  stable  across years .

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.10.731401 doi: bioRxiv preprint

17 

DISCUSSION 

Here, w e showed that functional network organization is  largely  stable  within 

individuals,  even across  extended time windows of over a decade.  The brain ’s

stability and individual -specific nature  indicate that  it  can encode functional 

characteristics of personhood that remain constant  amid temporal fluctuations and 

life transitions . These observations  ref ine  current views  of brain resilience and 

plasticity  by  highlighting the capacity of  homeostatic mechanisms  to  maintain 

idiosyncratic  network features . These insights  also  pave the way for a more 

comprehensive understanding of the neural mechanisms behind  stability  to  pinpoint 

critical markers of healthy  brain function  for clinical  applications .

Functional networks as s table neural signatures of individual identity 

Our findings  suggest  that  functional network s putatively  serve as  trait -like  marker s,

preserving stable characteristics in the face of  changing  life experiences . Previous 

studies demonstrated that  resting -state functional connectivity is  preserved  across 

di stinct  mental  (Cole et al., 2014; Du et al., 2025b; Gratton et al., 2018)  and 

physiological states , including light sleep and anesthesia  (Horovitz et al., 2009; 

Larson -Prior et al., 2011; Laumann & Snyder, 2021) . We show that this stability 

extends  even  across prolonged periods during which participants experienced major 

life stressors and transitions, highlighting that network organization is robust not only 

to state fluctuations but also to long -term changes in life circumstances. 

Our findings are also consistent with prior longitudinal report s using comparatively 

limited data  (Badhwar et al., 2020; Horien et al., 2019; Jalbrzikowski et al., 2020) .

For example, individuals  could be re -identified with comparable accuracy  when 

scans  were  conducted  on the same day versus when they were conducted  1.5 years 

apart  (Jalbrzikowski et al., 2020) . A stud y in mice ha s shown that  mouse  functional 

connectivity remain ed  relatively  stable from juvenile to adult stages  across months 

once major developmental  milestones  had  occurred  (Millevert et al., 2025) .

This stability  is consistent  with  models  proposing that  functional connectivity  reflects 

a statistical  history of co -activations between  brain  regions  (Petersen & Sporns, 

2015; Poldrack et al., 2015) , constrained by a combination of  direct anatomical 

connections  (Honey et al., 2009; Laumann & Snyder, 2021)  and indirect network 

dynamics  (Honey et al., 2009; Park & Friston, 2013) . While some have proposed that 

these network dynamics may be highly malleable, the  robust stability  we find across 

more than  a decade suggests that  functional  network  dynamics are stably 

maintained to withstand contextual stressors, likely through  homeostatic 

mechanisms  (Laumann & Snyder, 2021) . Thus, w hile  more  transient dynamics  likely 

also  exist  (Calhoun et al., 2014; J. R. Cohen, 2018; Gonzalez -Castillo & Bandettini, 

2018; Hutchison et al., 2013; Lurie et al., 2020) , they  are  embedded within a 

dominant, stable network structure. 

These stable features indicate that n etwork organization  may be a  biological 

substrate of individual  identity  and  complex  cognition, characterizing  our 

personhood . Differences in the spatial arrangement of functional regions have been 

strongly linked to inter -individual behavioral differences  (Bijsterbosch et al., 2018; 

Finn et al., 2015; Miranda -Dominguez et al., 2014; Pierce et al., 2024) . While such 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.10.731401 doi: bioRxiv preprint

18 

topographical variation is highly stable within individuals, it constitutes the biggest 

source of variation across individuals  (Bijsterbosch et al., 2018) . In accordance with 

this,  topographical variation can predict  inter -individual variation in  higher -order 

cogniti ve abilities, such as fluid intelligence  (Kong et al., 2019) , that shape complex 

human behavior .

Taken together,  the convergence of temporal stability, biological grounding, and 

cognitive relevance suggests that network features capture individually distinctive 

and enduring aspects of brain organization, constituting  possible  biological  markers 

of individual identity. 

Reconciling stability with neural  plasticity 

Our data show ing  high  stability  in  functional network  topography across even a 

decade  may, at  first , appear surprising  given findings  in  the literature o n brain 

plasticity. However,  we suggest these findings can be reconciled by considering that 

functional  topography  may be most malleable and subject to  dramatic  and lasting 

changes during critical  developmental  periods, after which network changes are 

largely focal  (Gratton & Braga, 2026) . This approach to plasticity would allow brain 

organization to  remain  stable and resilient to outside forces,  supporting individual 

identity and  protecting the brain from extreme changes at the whims of recent 

experiences. 

Although not targeted in our study,  additional  sources of potential variation in brain 

networks are neurodevelopmental  (Fair et al., 2009; Fransson et al., 2007; Gao et 

al., 2015; Gratton et al., 2018; Grayson & Fair, 2017; Nielsen et al., 2019; 

Satterthwaite et al., 2012; Smyser et al., 2010)  and ag ing -related  processes 

(Campbell et al., 2012; Madden et al., 2010; Spreng & Schacter, 2012) . In the 

developing brain, networks become more specialized, with within -network 

connectivity  strengthening as they mature into more cohesive and functionally 

distinct systems  (Baum et al., 2017; Gao et al., 2015; Grayson & Fair, 2017) , and 

potentially more individualized into adulthood  (Demeter et al., 2025) . In contrast to 

these common developmental patterns, patients  with congenital or perinatal damage 

can develop atypical large -scale network organization, as evidenced by the unusual 

motor organization in patient PS1  (Laumann et al., 2021)  and language network in 

patient EG  (Tuckute et al., 2022)  (see also  (Newport et al., 2022) ). In addition, 

extreme variation in sensory or motor experience  can lead to idiosyncratic variation 

in functional relationships of primary sensory and  motor  regions  (Amaral et al., 2024; 

Schone et al., 2025) . These findings are consistent with animal literature, 

demonstrating that, while proto -functional organization is present from birth  (Arcaro 

& Livingstone, 2017) , sensory deprivation during critical periods can lead to 

substantial reorganization in functional responses  (Arcaro et al., 2017) .

However, a fter  critical  development , we show that  brain organization remain s quite 

stable  in adulthood . This is consistent with prior literature: in  Pa tient EG , who 

exhibits  atypical language organization  due to  congenital absence of  the  left 

temporal lobe , the  language network  remained  stable  during the  3-year longitudinal 

observation period  (Tuckute et al., 2022) . Similarly, t he functional connectivity  of 

primary visual cortex (V1) of people with congenital blindness  has been shown to be 

stable over time and contexts,  retaining  its  idiosyncratic profile  (Amaral et al., 2024) .

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.10.731401 doi: bioRxiv preprint

19 

Even in  the face of dramatic  changes in sensory experience , reorganization  appears 

unlikely  in adulthood , as  longitudinal neuroimaging of  three  adults before and after 

arm amputation showed that despite the loss of peripheral input, the intrinsic 

organization of hand -related activity in the sensorimotor cortex persisted, resisting 

remapping  (Schone et al., 2025) . Rare departures have been reported  primarily 

under extreme cases, such as major medical interventions  (Mitchell et al., 2020; 

Preller et al., 2020; Seitzman, Anandarajah, et al., 2023; Seitzman, Reynoso, et al., 

2023) .

As we have demonstrated,  functional n etwork architecture  may be  largely fixed  in 

adulthood , consistent with  these case reports . Th is  stability  is  particularly  notable 

when consider ing  major life events that occurred in  our  participants, including socio -

cultural and health phenomena (e.g., the COVID -19 pandemic), as well as personal 

experiences (e.g., childbirth and rearing, job transitions, cross -country moves , and 

death of a parent ). These examples align with events listed in the Social 

Readjustment Rating Scale  (Holmes & Rahe, 1967) , which identifies life -altering 

occurrences that are significant stressors impacting health and well -being. 

When network m odulations take place in response to experience or symptoms,  they 

are likely to take  a more  subtle  and transient  form, affecting  correlation strength 

among  specific relevant  connections . One  longitudinal study  that  scanned 

participants repeatedly before, during, and after wearing arm casts showed 

fluctuations in  the magnitude of  functional connectivity , but these were focal to 

primary motor regions and reversed with removal of the casts  (Newbold et al., 2020) .

Lynch  and colleague  (Lynch et al., 2024)  found evidence of an  enlarged salience 

network in individuals with depression  with a  topography  that  did not change over 

time ; however  the  magnitude of specific correlations  was  altered with  change s in 

symptoms.  Over time, these more focal changes may accumulate to longer lasting 

variation  (perhaps associated with the slight drift measured in our study in  Fig . 6),

but this process may extend over decades  in adulthood . This  functional stability  may 

provide a substrate for our enduring stability of self and resilience to outside forces. 

Identifying when idiosyncratic features first emerge  in the developing brain  and the 

temporal extent of their persistence throughout aging represents an important 

direction for future investigations. Our  findings  of stability set the stage for such work 

by delineating a temporal regime in  young, healthy adults  in  which network 

measures  are predominantly  stable. 

Clinical  implications of stable  functional networks 

Our findings underscore the value of precision fMRI in disentangling stable trait -like 

neural features from more transient  state -dependent fluctuations. Such stable 

individual baselines  may be  crucial for identifying subtle or progressive changes 

associated with pathology.  Distinguishing between stable functional topography and 

time -varying connectivity may enable early identification of neurodegenerative 

disease progression,  treatment effects,  and  target s for neuromodulation,  along with 

understanding  the impact of life events on mental health. 

As an  example, Lynch and colleagues  (Lynch et al., 2024)  showed that the 

topological features of the salience network, including its shape and size, remained 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.10.731401 doi: bioRxiv preprint

20 

stable  over months , and could even be  observed  prior to the onset of depression in 

children. Interestingly, more fine -scale fluctuations within this variant network could 

be used to  predict fluctuations in anhedonia and anxiety symptoms over time.  This 

exemplifies  how functional networks may serve as trait -like markers of risk for  clinical 

symptoms  and allow for sensitive detection of subtle markers linked to changing 

brain health. 

Sources  and limits  of  temporal  stability 

Although we demonstrated  that  functional brain  organization  was predominantly 

stable over time , some variability existed  that  can be  linked to measurement issues. 

For example, lower stability was observed in the inferior and medial temporal lobe 

and orbitofrontal cortex, where the BOLD  signal is more difficult to estimate  due to 

magnetic field inhomogeneities and physiological noise  (Bianciardi et al., 2009; 

Ojemann et al., 1997b; Thomas Yeo et al., 2011) . Relatively lower  stability was also 

observed in the Prolonged Cohort which may have been associated in part with 

differences  in scanner types and sequences (although these may also be linked  to 

the longer inter -scan intervals in this group). 

Another  potential  factor  that can cause apparent changes in functional connectivity is 

data quantity.  Compared to 30 minutes, using  10  minutes of resting -state fMRI data 

resulted in  dramatically  lower stability across sessions and time points ( Fig.  5), due 

to sampling variability in MRI  functional connectivity  measures  (Laumann et al., 

2015) . This  aligns with past literature  observing that  shorter scan durations result ed 

in poorer reliability of functional connectivity  (Noble et al., 2019) . Reducing 

measurement  noise  in functional connectivity is particularly important in longitudinal 

studies, as  biases  induced by noise  may otherwise look like meaningful changes 

(e.g.,  if people move more with age, leading to added data loss, apparent 

longitudinal effects of aging may be driven by sampling variability ). Therefore, it is 

critical to acquire precision -level  data and adopt advanced denoising techniques to 

robustly detect longitudinal changes  (Vinci -Booher et al., 2025) . Moreover , while it is 

uncommon in many longitudinal studies, having multiple sessions at each time point ,

as  in our dataset , can  be  highly  useful to  separate  longitudinal changes from  day -to -

day  variability. 

We  also  observed  relatively  larger  changes in visual and motor regions  (Fig. 6 ),

consistent with prior work  examining daily variability  within individuals  in functional 

networks  (Gratton et al., 2018; Laumann et al., 2015) . Analyses of the initial 

MyConnectome dataset  showed  that session -to -session variability was greatest in 

visual and somatomotor regions  over  a year, whereas relatively less variability was 

observed in the frontoparietal, default mode, ventral attention, and medial parietal 

regions  (Laumann et al., 2015) . These fluctuations were interpreted as reflecting 

state -related  factors , particularly variations in arousal  (Tagliazucchi & Laufs, 2014) ,

given that they also tracked with caffeination status . Recent  work has shown  that  the 

strongest brain -wide association s with socioeconomic factors  are  concentrated in 

primary motor and sensory networks in children  and exhibit strong spatial similarity 

to arousal -related patterns, includi ng sleep duration,  norepinephrine  signaling, and 

stimulant effects  (Marek et al., 2026) . These findings suggest that sensorimotor 

networks are  particularly  sensitive to fluctuations in arousal state, sleep, and other 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.10.731401 doi: bioRxiv preprint

21 

environmental exposures. Because these influences can  va ry substantially within 

individuals over time, sensorimotor netwo rks may be especially susceptible to 

longitudinal changes, and consequently, exhibit lower stability  than  hi gher -order 

association networks that  can be  relatively insulated from state -dependent 

fluctuations.  Interestingly,  in our data  these patterns of daily variability in 

sensorimotor regions were  mirrored, and indeed slightly amplified  across years, 

suggesting that they may accumulate  drift  over time. In contrast, in this age group  of 

healthy adults , association regions of the brain were relatively more stable, exhibiting 

trait -like tracking of person -specific networks even over long time windows. 

CONCLUSION 

We found that functional  brain networks  within individuals were  preserved across 

extended timescales  of over a decade  despite ongoing neural dynamics . When 

scanners  and protocols were  matched, we observed minimal changes over a 2 -year 

period, only subtly exceeding the variability seen in brain networks from day to day. 

These findings demonstrate that functional networks track individual identity and can 

withstand changes in the face of  major  life experiences. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.10.731401 doi: bioRxiv preprint

22 

METHODS 

Datasets 

Our  participants consist of  10  young, healthy adults  (five  females and  five  males, 

age d 23 -30  years, with a mean age of 26 , at  the  time  of  the  first  scan ). In each 

participant, we collected  structural and  functional MRI measures  (≥60 minutes  of 

resting -state fMRI  per time point)  across  two  or  three  time  points separated by  up to 

13  years  (see  Data Acquisition ).

We divided the p articipants  into t wo cohorts: the  Prolonged  Longitudinal  Cohort 

and the  Standard  Longitudinal  Cohort  (Fig. 1 ). Three  participants  from  the 

Prolonged  Longitudinal  Cohort  (iLong01 -03 ) we re also included in  the Standard 

Longitudinal  Cohort  (iLong01 -10) , but  we distinguished  the se  cohort s to  highlight  that 

Prolonged  Cohort  sessions were conducted with extended  delay s (8 or 13 years) 

using  di fferent  scanner s and  imaging  protocol s (see  Table 1 ). Standard Cohort 

sessions were conducted with shorter intervals (1 -3 years ; Table  3) using the same 

scanner  and protocols . We  replicated our Prolonged Cohort findings using  the 

publicly available  MyConnectome data  (male, 45 years old at the time of  the  first 

scan ) supplemented by additional resting -state fMRI data  collected a decade later 

(iLong11 ; Table  2).

Prolonged Longitudinal Cohort:  Two participants  from  the Prolonged  Longitudinal 

Cohort  (iLong01  and  iLong 02 ) were  scanned at  the  University of California , Berkeley ,

in 2009  (IRB: 2010 -02 -781)  for their first time  point . A single session , consisting of 60 

min utes  of resting -state  fMRI data , was collected from each participant.  These 

participants  were  also  included as healthy controls in previous studies  (Gratton et al., 

2012; Nomura et al., 2010) .

The third  participant (iLong03)  was  scanned at Washington University  in  St . Louis  in 

2014  (IRB : 201402100 ) for  their first time point  and is  part  of the Midnight Scan Club 

data  (Gordon et al., 2017) . Ten fMRI sessions across approximately  three  weeks 

were collected from this participant, accumulating 300 minutes of resting -state fMRI 

data. 

Subsequent time  points followed the data collection procedures described in the 

Standard Longitudinal Cohort. 

Replication dataset:  The  replication  participant (iLong11) was scanned  at University 

of Texas at Austin  in 2012, with the data released in 2014 as the MyConnectome 

dataset  (Laumann et al., 2015; Poldrack et al., 2015) (IRB  determined study to be not 

human subject research ). This data set  was  supplemented with a dditional longitudinal 

data collected in 2022  at Stanford University .

We  began by  investigat ing  the temporal stability of functional brain organization  in 

the Prolonged C ohort  to  address whether brain organization remains stable over 

extended  time windows. We assessed temporal stability in (i) network assignment 

across the whole brain, (ii) spatial correlation  of the functional connectivity  seed map 

of each vertex , and (iii)  idiosyncratic  network variants. These measures represent 

systematic organization of intrinsic functional connectivity  that  can  capture individual -

specific features. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.10.731401 doi: bioRxiv preprint

23 

Standard Longitudinal Cohort:  We then conducted more controlled investigations of 

the  functional organization  measures by  collecting data in  10  participants with 

match ed  scan protocols.  The  scans  were  conducted  between 2019 and 2022  at  two 

or  three  longitudinal time points  at  Northwestern University  (IRB:  STU00208793) 

using  the same  scan  protocols . For these time  points, participants completed  four 

sessions of fMRI data collection across different days (with  three  exceptions: 

iLong03 completed  two  sessions at time point 2 , and  iLong0 4 completed  five  and 

eight  sessions at time  points 1 and 2, respectively). This allowed us to collect  more 

than  89 min utes  of resting -state data  at  each time  point. 

Table 1.  Participant demographics and scanning parameters  for  the  Prolonged 

Longitudinal Cohort . The  Prolonged  Cohort consists of  three  participants. Two 

participants’ data span approximately 13 years, from 2009 to 2022, and one 

participant’s data span 8 years, from 2014 to 2022.  Participant  demographic 

information  includes  age at  time point (TP) 1  and  sex.  The number of fMRI sessions 

collected per  TP , the number of runs per session,  repetition time ( TR ; in seconds ),

and scan duration ( in minutes ( Mins )) are also shown . The minimum  scan duration  is 

60 minutes ( 58 minutes  after processing and censoring high head motion frames) ,

which is sufficient for reliable examination of  individual cortical  network m ap s

(Gordon et al., 2017) . At the second time point  (2022 ), data were collected  using 

different  scan parameters  (refer to  Table  3).

Table 2.  Participant demographics and scanning parameters for  the replication 

dataset . From the  initial  MyConnectome  dataset (100 sessions), we selected  six 

sessions collected within a two -month period (10/29/2012 -12/10/2012) , and f or the 

second time point in 2022, we used all available sessions  acquired within a 

comparable two -month window (10/03/2022 -11/19/2022). The first four sessions  at 

this  second  time point were collected  with  a multiecho sequence and the remaining 

six with a single -echo sequence.  To combine the se  datasets, we used the second 

echo from the multiecho scans, which had a n echo time  closest to the single -echo 

acquisition.  Other a cquisition parameters (e.g., TR , reported  in seconds , and voxel 

size) also differed; see  Data Acquisition  below for details. No. Session No. Run /TP1 /Session 

iLong01 23 F 2009 1 6 1.375 60 2022 iLong02 23 M 2009 1 6 1.375 60 2022 iLong03 24 F 2014 10 1 2.2 300 2022 

Age ID Sex TP1 TR Mins/TP1 TP2 

Prolonged No. No. No. Session Session Run Mins Mins /TP1 /TP2 /Session /TP1 /TP2               

> TR 1
> 64
> TR 2
> Prolonged iLong11 45 M2012 2022 6
> ID Age Sex TP1 TP2
> 31~4 1.16 1.49, 1.25 61
> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.10.731401 doi: bioRxiv preprint

24 

Table  3. Participant demographics and scanning parameters  for  the  Standard 

Longitudinal Cohort.  The controlled cohort, using matching scanner and scan 

protocols, consists of  10  participants. All scans were conducted at Northwestern 

University. Participants underwent either  two  or  three  scan  time  points.  The minimum 

scan duration  per time point  is 89 minutes.  iLong01, iLong0 2, and iLong 03  are part 

of the Prolonged  Cohort , with  the second time point  (2022)  of the Standard  Cohort 

for these participants corresponding to the second time point of the Prolonged 

Longitudinal Cohort .

Data  Acquisition 

All  datasets include d structural and  functional  MRI . Functional MRI measures 

included  resting -state  scans , which were the primary  focus of analysis in this study. 

In  these  resting -state fMRI scans , participants were instructed to  remain relax ed ,

still,  and keep their eyes open, focusing on a fixation point . For each institution, 

scanner make and s canning parameters w ere  as follows: 

• University of California Berkeley:  Imaging was conducted using a 3T Siemens 

MAGNETOM Trio, equipped with a 12 -channel head coil.  Structural images were 

acquired using an axial MP -RAGE 3D T1 -weighted sequence (repetition time 

(TR) = 2,300 ms, echo time (TE) = 2.98 ms, flip angle = 9°,  isotropic voxel size = 

1 mm 3).  A gradient -echo EPI BOLD sequence was applied with the  following 

parameters:  TR = 1,370 ms,  TE = 50 ms, voxel size = 2.34375  x 2.34375  x 3.85 

mm, and twenty -four 3.85 -mm -thick axial slices.  See  (Gratton et al., 2012; 

Nomura et al., 2010)  for further details .

• Washington University in  St. Louis : Imaging was carried out on a 3T Siemens 

MAGNETOM  Trio.  Structural MRI was conducted across two days, collecting T1 -

weighted images (TR = 2,400 ms, TE = 3.74 ms,  inversion time ( TI ) = 1,000 ms, 

flip angle = 8°, isotropic voxel size = 0.8 mm 3, 224 slices) , T2 -weighted images, 

MRAs , and MRVs.  A gradient -echo EPI BOLD sequence was used with these 

settings:  TR = 2 ,200  ms,  TE = 27 ms , flip angle = 90°, isotropic voxel size = 4 

mm 3, and 36 axial slices.  Refer to  (Gordon et al., 2017)  for further information .

• Northwestern University : Data were collected  using  a 3T Siemens  MAGNETOM 

Prisma scanner, equipped with a 64 -channel head coil.  Structural images were 

collected using 3D T1 -weighted images (TR =  2, 300  ms, TE =  1.9  ms,  TI = 1, 18 0

ms,  flip angle =  7°, isotropic voxel size =  0.8  mm 3, 176 slices).  A gradient -echo 

EPI BOLD sequence was employed with the following parameters:  TR = 1,100 No. No. No. No. Session Session Session Run Mins Mins Mins /TP1 /TP2 /TP3 /Session /TP1 /TP2 /TP3                                                                                                                                                    

> iLong01 35 F22021 2022 -44-9~11 1.1 218 198 -iLong02 34 M22021 2022 -44-9~11 1.1 213 193 -iLong03 29 F22020 2022 -42-7~10 1.1 153 89 -iLong04 29 M32019 2020 2022 5846~10 1.1 189 342 178 iLong05 26 M32019 2021 2022 4447~11 1.1 153 198 168 iLong06 27 M32019 2021 2022 4446~9 1.1 158 149 178 iLong07 30 F22019 2022 -44-7~9 1.1 163 173 -iLong08 26 F22019 2022 -44-7~10 1.1 153 183 -iLong09 28 M22021 2022 -44-7~10 1.1 144 178 -iLong10 26 F22021 2022 -44-7~10 1.1 153 183 -
> ID Age Sex No. TP TP1 TP2 TP3 TR
> Standard
> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.10.731401 doi: bioRxiv preprint

25 

ms,  TE  = 25 ms, flip angle = 80°, isotropic voxel size = 2.5 mm 3, and 60 axial 

slices. Multiband imaging was used with an acceleration factor of 4. 

• University of Texas at Austin : Imaging  was conducted using  a 3T Siemens Skyra 

MRI scanner  with  a 32 -channel head coil.  Of the 10 0 sessions  the initial 

MyConnectome dataset provides , we selected  sessions  15, 18, 21, 24, 27,  and 

30  that were high -quality sessions in which at least 9 1% of frames were retained 

after censoring high -motion frames based on  filtered framewise displacement 

(fFD) calculations  to  match  the data quantity available in the post -10 -year 

protocols . These sessions also included complete anatomical, field map, and 

functional data.  T1 -weighted images were acquired using an MP -RAGE 

sequence ( TR = 2,400 ms,  TE = 2.14 ms, TI = 1,000 ms, flip angle = 8°, GRAPPA 

factor = 2 , isotropic voxel size =  0.8  mm 3, 256 slices ). Resting -state fMRI data 

were acquired using a multiband EPI sequence (TR = 1 ,16 0 ms, TE = 30 ms , flip 

angle = 63°, voxel size = 2.4 × 2.4 × 2 mm, 68 slices, multiband factor = 4). 

Starting with session 27, the slice count was reduced to 64 due to an update that 

altered the minimum TR. Acoustic noise reduction was attempted using an 

Optoacoustics act ive noise -cancellation system.  Refer to  (Poldrack et al., 2015) 

and associated dataset documentation for further acquisition details. 

• Stanford University:  Imaging was performed at the Stanford Center for Cognitive 

and Neurobiological Imaging  using  a 3T GE SIGNA  Premier  scanner  with a Nova 

32 -channel head coil . T1 -weighted images were acquired using a 3D MP -RAGE 

sequence (TR = 3,000 ms, TE = 3.548 ms, TI = 1,060 ms, flip angle = 8 °,

isotropic voxel size = 0.8  mm 3).  Th e first four sessions employed a  multiecho 

sequence for resting -state data  (TR = 1, 49 0 ms, TE s = 13.4,  36.4 , and 59.4  ms ,

flip angle =  53 °, isotropic voxel size = 2.8  mm 3). From the  3 echo es, we selected 

the second echo , which  had a TE closest to the single -echo scans.  For the 

subsequent six sessions, data were acquired  on the  same scanner  using  a 48 -

channel head coil  with a single -echo EPI se quence.  (TR = 1 ,25 0 ms, TE = 30 ms, 

flip angle = 53°, 2.2 mm isotropic voxels, 64 slices, multiband factor = 4). 

Data and Code Availability 

Not all data used in this  study can be made publicly available  due to  restrictions in 

the original IRB protocols . However, a subset of the data is accessible at OpenNeuro 

(Midnight Scan Club (MSC) dataset 

https://openneuro.org/datasets/ds000224/versions/00001 ) and NIMH’s NDA 

(iNetworks dataset) ; only the data from participants who consented to share with the 

NDA during their final questionnaire is available on the NDA platform .

MyConnectome  and the follow -up  data are publicly available at OpenNeuro 

(https://openneuro.org/datasets/ds000031/versions/2.0 .2 ). 

All  data processing and analysis code (custom Matlab scripts, 

https://github.com/GrattonLab/iLongitudinal ) are  publicly available. 

Preprocessing 

We used  fMRIPrep 23.2.0  to preprocess data,  with consistent structural and 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.10.731401 doi: bioRxiv preprint

26 

functional workflows across cohorts, except for a few site -specific differences 

detailed below.  Structural T1 -weighted (T1w) images underwent intensity non -

uniformity correction  with N4BiasFieldCorrection , skull stripping using Advanced 

Normalization Tools (ANTs) with the OASIS30ANTs template, brain tissue 

segmentation into gray matter, white matter, and cerebrospinal fluid using  fast  FSL, 

and surface reconstruction with FreeSurfer 7.3.2  (recon -all) . The brain mask was 

refined using a Mindboggle -based method that reconciles ANTs - and FreeSurfer -

derived segmentations, producing a hybrid brain mask to improve cortical gray 

matter delineation.  Volume -based s patial normalization to MNI152NLin6Asym  and 

MNI152NLin2009cAsym  space was performed via nonlinear registration using ANTs. 

For functional preprocessing,  a reference volume was generated  from the BOLD 

time series  following  susceptibility distortion correction , where applicable. For data 

(aside  for those  acquired at  the  University of California , Berkeley ) a dual -echo 

Gradient -Recalled Echo  (GRE)  sequence  was used to estimate the B 0 fieldmap. 

Slice timing correction was then  performed  only  for  data collected at Washington 

University in Saint Louis , given its  longer TR  and single band acquisition . Head 

motion correction was performed  using mcflirt (FSL) , estimating r igid -body motion 

parameters  (trans lations  and rotations ), along with the corresponding transformation 

matrices,  prior to  any spatiotemporal filtering.  The BOLD reference was  then  co -

registered to the T1 -weighted anatomical image  using bbregister  (FreeSurfer) ,

employing  boundary -based registration  with  six  degrees of freedom. All spatial 

transformations —including motion correction,  susceptibility distortion correction,  and 

co -registration —were combined and applied in a single interpolation step using 

nitransforms with cubic B -spline interpolation. 

Functional  Connectivity  Processing 

Resting -state fMRI data  underwent  additional denoising  procedures  following  the 

pipeline described by  Power et al. (2014) , to reduce noise from physiological sources 

of non -interest such as respiration, heart rate, and head motion . BOLD time series 

were intensity -normalized  using  mode -1000 normalization . The  time series were 

then demeaned and detrended to remove slow scanner -related fluctuations. 

Nuisance regression was performed to remove motion (Friston  36 -parameter model 

with  white matter, CSF, and global signals, along with their  squares and  temporal 

derivatives ). High -motion frames were  censored  using framewise displacement  (FD) ,

based on  filtered FD  (fFD>0.1 mm) , where  a low -pass filter  (<0.1 Hz ) was applied  to 

the motion parameters to  attenuate  high -frequency respira tion -related artifacts 

(Gratton et al., 2020) . Additionally, t he first five frames of each run and any segments 

shorter than five frames  after censoring  were  also  marked for removal . Censored 

frames were  interpolated  over  using power -spectral matched interpolation.  After 

interpolation, a  temporal bandpass filter  (0.009 -0.08 Hz ) was applied to the data.  A

final round of demeaning and detrending was  then  performed. The resulting cleaned 

BOLD data were used for subsequent  functional connectivity  analyses, with 

censored  frames  excluded bas ed on the  created  temporal masks .

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.10.731401 doi: bioRxiv preprint

27 

Volume -To -Surface Mapping 

After preprocessing,  BOLD timeseries data were mapped to each participant’s native 

cortical surface. Th is  native surface was then aligned to the  FSLR -32k  surface 

following  Gordon et al.'s (2016)  procedure. All  subsequent  data  analyses  were 

conducted on the cortical surface , except for  the creation of  functional connectivity 

similarity matrices  of the cortical volume  (Fig . 5 and Supp. Figs. 2  and  3), which 

were based on volumetric  cortical regions of interest  (‘Seitzman 300’; see below for 

details) .

Data  Analysis 

We  discarded  runs shorter than 2.75 minutes after  censoring high -motion frames ,

resulting in the removal of one run each from iLong0 4 (4th session, 1st run), iLong06 

(7th session, 2nd run), and iLong 10  (2nd session, 6th run). Additionally, we 

discarded  sessions shorter than 30.25 minutes  after censoring , which led to the 

removal of one session from iLong0 4 (1st session), iLong06 (5th session) and 

iLong 10  (2nd session).  This was based on prior work demonstrating that 

approximately 30 minutes of low -motion data are required for highly reliable 

functional connectivity estimation  (Gordon et al., 2017) . For any session -level 

comparisons  (Figs.  3b, 4b-6; Supp. Figs.  2 and  6), the data were matched to this 

duration to  avoid confounding session differences with differences in data quantity .

When we censored low -SNR regions, we used  a group -level  binary  map  identifying 

vertices with low temporal signal -to -noise ratio (tSNR). This map exclud es  vertices 

with intensity -normalized signal  values  below 750  du ring  functional connectivity 

processing. 

Template -matching : We employed template -matching techniques to assign  vertices 

in  functional connectivity seed maps  to  networks . This method uses group -averaged 

network seed maps generated  from  the  WashU -120 data set  (consisting  of  an 

independent set of  120 young adults;  see  Dworetsky et al., 2021  for details on 

template  creation ) to identify  14 distinct  functional  networks . The  Dice coefficient  was 

calculated  between  each of  the  14  binarized network templates and each 

participant’s functional connectivity map  at each vertex . The  vertex was assigned to 

the  network  with  the highest  Dice coefficient using a winner -take -all approach.  This 

process was applied to  all of the vertices in the  cortical surface data  and repeated 

independently  at  each time point  (or session , for some analyses)  to assess  network 

assignment  cons ensus  over  time.  For time -point -level maps, all available data were 

used to maximize individual -level precision ( Figs . 2a and  3a), wh ile  for session -level 

maps, the data amount s were  matched  (30.25 minutes)  to en sure  consistency for 

statistical  comparison s (Fig.  3b).  Consensus maps  were  generated  by  assigning 

each vertex to the network with which it was consistent across time points or 

sessions .

Seed -based correlation mapping:  As a second step, we examined the  temporal 

stability of  continuous  vertex -wise  functional connectivity  using  seed -based 

correlation analysis . We created  surface -based  functional connectivity  seed  maps by 

computing  correlations  between every pair of vertices  at  each time point . T hen, t o

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.10.731401 doi: bioRxiv preprint

28 

assess temporal consistency , we  co mpared  the se  vertex -level  connectivity maps 

across  two time points  (or sessions)  using Pearson correlation.  Figure  2b presents 

the resulting spatial correlation maps for the Prolonged Cohort . Fig ure . 2c provides 

a dot plot of  the  values averaged across the  cortex  after censoring low tSNR 

vertices . Fig ure  4 display s the  results  for the Standard Cohort.  For comparisons 

across time points and participants in  the  Figure  4a matrix , data were matched  to 8 6

minutes  per time point , corresponding to  the m aximum  amount of low -motion data 

available  across all participants  after censoring . In contrast, to maximize within -

participant precision for  the  Figure  4a brain maps  (which involved comparisons 

across time points within individuals but not across participants ), data were  retained 

at  136 per time point, except for iLong03, who had a maximum 86 minutes per time 

point . For session -level comparisons shown in  Figure 4 b, data  amounts  were 

matched to 30 .25  minutes per session. 

Volumetric ROI -based analysis of the similarity of functional connectivity maps:  We 

also conducted analyses of the similarity in functional connectivity between 

volumetric regions of interest (ROI). We used previously defined atlas coordinates 

(‘Seitzman 300’;  (Seitzman et al., 2020) ) as a reference for the ROIs. After excluding 

censored frames  with  high  head motion , the preprocessed BOLD time series for gray 

matter voxels were averaged for each ROI. The Pearson correlation coefficients 

were computed between the mean time series of every pair of ROIs, resulting in a 

300 x 300 correlation matrix for each participant.  This correlation matrix was created 

for each session  and the upper triangle was compared across sessions and 

participants to generate a similarity functional connectivity ma trix , as shown in 

Figure  5. This figure compares similarity matrices  when using  30 minutes  versus  10

minutes.  Supplementary Figure  2 presents results from comparisons of correlation 

matrices across sessions , shown  as a dot plot using  sessions from  the f urthest  two 

time points.  Supplementary  Figure  3 shows linear  fixed -effect modeling results with 

these volume -based analyses. 

Linear fi xed -effects modeling of functional connectivity similarity:  To quantify the 

extent to which elapsed time between sessions contributes to  longitudinal  functional 

connectivity  similarity, we  employed  linear  fixed -effects models  on  pairwise  session 

comparisons  using the  volumetric  Seitzman 300 -ROI atlas  (Supp.  Fig.  3). For each 

participant,  a 300x300  functional connectivity  matri x and a corresponding voxel -wise 

tSNR map were  generated  for e very  session.  ROIs were subjected to a two -tier 

censoring process: first,  11  ROIs with a group -mean tSNR below 30 were excluded. 

Second, for each participant, ROIs falling within the bottom 10 th  percentile of that 

individual ’s specific tSNR distribution were censored. For the remaining data, 

functional connectivity similarity was defined as the Pearson correlation between 

corresponding connectivity profiles of session pairs. 

For each  ROI , models were  implemented  using the  fitlm  function in Matlab with the 

following  specification :

𝐹𝑢𝑛𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑎𝑙  𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑛𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑖𝑡𝑦  𝑠𝑖𝑚𝑖𝑙𝑎𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦 ~ 𝐸𝑙𝑎𝑝𝑠𝑒𝑑  𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒  + 𝑆𝑖𝑔𝑛𝑎𝑙  𝑞𝑢𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦  (𝑡𝑆𝑁𝑅 ) + 𝐷𝑎𝑡𝑎  𝑞𝑢𝑎𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦 

+ 𝑃𝑎𝑟𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑝𝑎𝑛𝑡 

The inter -session interval ( elapsed time  in days) served  as the primary fixed effect. 

We also included the mean  tSNR of the session pair  and  the mean number of 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.10.731401 doi: bioRxiv preprint

29 

retained data points  after censoring high -motion frames  as nuisance covariates to 

control for signal quality  and  data quantity  (ranged from  1,557 -2,915  volumes ),

respectively.  A ‘participant bas eline’ variable was included to account for inter -

individual differences in stability of networks.  All predictors were standardized (z -

scored) prior to model  fitting  to facilitate comparison across  variables with  different 

scales and to ensure  that the  intercept  represented  the expected similarity at the 

baseline . To assess the  relative  contribution of each  predictor , variance partitioning 

was derived from the ANOVA tables  obtained using Matlab ’s anova  function. For 

eac h factor,  the effect size was quantified using  𝜔 2, calculated as  follows  (J. Cohen, 

1973) :

𝜔 2 = 𝑆𝑆 𝑒𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑐𝑡  − 𝑑𝑓 𝑒𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑐𝑡  ∗ 𝑀𝑆 𝑒𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑟 

𝑆𝑆 𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙  + 𝑀𝑆 𝑒𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑟 

Network variants:  We defined network variants as locations within an individual’s 

brain where the functional connectivity patterns differ significantly from the group 

average , following  (Seitzman et al., 2019) . For each participant, the functional 

connectivity map of every cortical vertex was correlated with the same vertex’s seed 

map of the reference group -average data (WashU -120 ; (Power et al., 2011) ). This 

procedure produced an individual -to -group similarity map, where each vertex in the 

map reflects a spatial correlation value  (Supp. Fig.  7). This similarity map was then 

thresholded to the lowest  10 % to identify regions where the individual’s connectivity 

was least similar to the group. These regions were  then  binarized to define potential 

variant locations. Regions with low -SNR were excluded, using a vertex -wise map of 

low -signal areas, as described in Seitzman  et al. (2019). The final binarized maps, 

created for each time point  using all available data  for each participant  (Supp. Fig. 

5), were matched with Dice coefficient to assess consistency across time ( Fig.  7). 

Supp lementary  Fig ure  6 shows a dot plot of variant  comparison s across the 

furthest two time points  using the  Dice coefficient , with  match ed  data amounts  (30.25 

minutes  per session ). We also generated  Supplementary Figure  8 to  examine the 

network variant composition  and its temporal stability.  We first generated network 

composition maps for each participant at each time point by combining binary variant 

maps (thresholded at the bottom 10% of spatial correlation values and SNR -masked) 

with the corresponding template -matching network topography. E ach variant vertex 

was labeled according to its assigned network. To identify stable variants, we 

computed a consensus map for each participant, defined as vertices that 

consistently appeared as variants across all time points. 

Permutation -based statistical  test s: We  conducted  permutation test s for the Standard 

Longitudinal data  to  compare  within -participant similarity across distant time points 

(red dots) against between -participant similarity (black dots) . The  same  permutation 

procedure was applied to  template matching  consensus  (Fig.  3b),  functional 

connectivity similarity ( Supp. Fig.  2),  and network variant overlap ( Supp. Fig.  6),

with the specific comparisons tailored to each analysis . We employed group -level 

permutation testing (10,000 permutations), treating the participant as the primary unit 

of inference. For each participant, we calculated the mean difference in similarity 

between the two conditions  (within  versus  between comparisons) . We used the two 

temporally most distant time points for the within -participant measure. To generate a 

null distribution, we employed  a label -shuffling  approach,  where the condition labels 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.10.731401 doi: bioRxiv preprint

30 

were randomly reassigned . The group -level  p-value was determined by comparing 

the observed mean difference to this permutation -based null distribution. 

For the Prolonged Longitudinal data, we conducted  a non -parametric  permutation 

test  comparing  three  within -participant  differences (one for each participant) to 24 

between -participant  differences (eight for each participant). Unlike the approach 

used for the Standard Longitudinal data , this pooled analysis of aggregating across 

participants was done to  avoid low statistical power  in testing  whether within -

participant  consistency exceed s between -participant  similarity.  Within -participant 

consistency was quantified by comparing each participant’s two time points  (e.g., 

iLong01  time  point  1 versus  time  point  2) , and between -participant  similarity  was 

calculated from all pairwise comparisons between different participants across all 

combinations of time points  (e.g., iLong01  time  point  1 versus  iLong0 2 time  point  2), 

yielding a total of  24 comparisons.  The observed difference in mean  between the 

within -participant  group  (n=3) and between -participant  group  (n=24) was compared 

against a null distribution generated from  10 ,000  random permutations of the group 

labels .

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.10.731401 doi: bioRxiv preprint

31 

REFERENCES 

Albert, N. B., Robertson, E. M., & Miall, R. C. (2009). The Resting Human Brain and Motor 

Learning.  Current Biology , 19 (12), 1023 –1027. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2009.04.028 

Allen, E. A., Damaraju, E., Plis , S. M., Erhardt, E. B., Eichele, T., & Calhoun, V. D. (2014). 

Tracking Whole -Brain Connectivity Dynamics in the Resting State.  Cerebral Cortex ,

24 (3), 663 –676. https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhs352 

Amaral, L., Thomas, P., Amedi, A., & Striem -Amit, E. (2024). Longitudinal stability of 

individual brain plasticity patterns in blindness.  Proceedings of the National Academy 

of Sciences , 121 (32), e2320251121. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2320251121 

Arcaro, M. J., & Livingstone, M. S. (2017). A hierarchical, retinotopic proto -organization of 

the primate visual system at birth.  eLife , 6, e26196. 

https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.26196 

Arcaro, M. J., Schade, P. F., Vincent, J. L., Ponce, C. R., & Livingstone, M. S. (2017). Seeing 

faces is necessary for face -domain formation.  Nature Neuroscience , 20 (10), 1404 –

1412. https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.4635 

Badhwar, A., Collin -Verreault, Y., Orban, P., Urchs , S., Chouinard, I., Vogel, J., Potvin, O., 

Duchesne, S., & Bellec, P. (2020). Multivariate consistency of resting -state fMRI 

connectivity maps acquired on a single individual over 2.5 years, 13 sites and 3 

vendors.  NeuroImage , 205 , 116210. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2019.116210 

Baum, G. L., Ciric, R., Roalf, D. R., Betzel, R. F., Moore, T. M., Shinohara, R. T., Kahn, A. E., 

Vandekar, S. N., Rupert, P. E., Quarmley , M., Cook, P. A., Elliott, M. A., Ruparel, K., 

Gur, R. E., Gur, R. C., Bassett, D. S., & Satterthwaite, T. D. (2017). Modular 

Segregation of Structural Brain Networks Supports the Development of Executive 

Function in Youth.  Current Biology , 27 (11), 1561 -1572.e8. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.10.731401 doi: bioRxiv preprint

32 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2017.04.051 

Bianciardi , M., Fukunaga, M., Van Gelderen, P., Horovitz, S. G., De Zwart, J. A., Shmueli, K., 

& Duyn, J. H. (2009). Sources of functional magnetic resonance imaging signal 

fluctuations in the human brain at rest: A 7 T study.  Magnetic Resonance Imaging ,

27 (8), 1019 –1029. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mri.2009.02.004 

Bijsterbosch , J. D., Woolrich, M. W., Glasser, M. F., Robinson, E. C., Beckmann, C. F., Van 

Essen, D. C., Harrison, S. J., & Smith, S. M. (2018). The relationship between spatial 

configuration and functional connectivity of brain regions.  eLife , 7, e32992. 

https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.32992 

Biswal, B., Zerrin Yetkin, F., Haughton, V. M., & Hyde, J. S. (1995). Functional connectivity in 

the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo ‐planar mri.  Magnetic Resonance 

in Medicine , 34 (4), 537 –541. https://doi.org/10.1002/mrm.1910340409 

Calhoun, V. D., Miller, R., Pearlson, G., & Adalı, T. (2014). The Chronnectome: Time -Varying 

Connectivity Networks as the Next Frontier in fMRI Data Discovery.  Neuron , 84 (2), 

262 –274. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2014.10.015 

Campbell, K. L., Grady, C. L., Ng, C., & Hasher, L. (2012). Age differences in the 

frontoparietal cognitive control network: Implications for distractibility. 

Neuropsychologia , 50 (9), 2212 –2223. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2012.05.025 

Cohen, J. (1973). Eta -Squared and Partial Eta -Squared in Fixed Factor Anova Designs. 

Educational and Psychological Measurement , 33 (1), 107 –112. 

https://doi.org/10.1177/001316447303300111 

Cohen, J. R. (2018). The behavioral and cognitive relevance of time -varying, dynamic 

changes in functional connectivity.  NeuroImage , 180 , 515 –525. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2017.09.036 

Cole, M. W., Bassett, D. S., Power, J. D., Braver, T. S., & Petersen, S. E. (2014). Intrinsic 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.10.731401 doi: bioRxiv preprint

33 

and Task -Evoked Network Architectures of the Human Brain.  Neuron , 83 (1), 238 –

251. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2014.05.014 

Costa, P. (1986). Personality stability and its implications for clinical psychology.  Clinical 

Psychology Review , 6(5), 407 –423. https://doi.org/10.1016/0272 -7358(86)90029 -2

Damoiseaux, J. S., Rombouts, S. A. R. B., Barkhof , F., Scheltens, P., Stam, C. J., Smith, S. 

M., & Beckmann, C. F. (2006). Consistent resting -state networks across healthy 

subjects.  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 103 (37), 13848 –13853. 

https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0601417103 

Demeter, D. V., Feigelis, M., D’Andrea, C. B., Ali, S. A., Baim, A. R., Koithan, E., Stearns, J., 

Zreik, S., Ahern, J., Park, S., Chang, S. E., Miller, R. L., Hampton, J. M., Schlaggar ,

B. L., Marek, S., Gordon, E. M., Dosenbach, N. U., Gratton, C., & Greene, D. J. 

(2025).  Precision functional mapping reveals less inter -individual variability in the 

child vs. Adult human brain . Neuroscience. 

https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.21.665760 

Dhond, R. P., Yeh, C., Park, K., Kettner, N., & Napadow, V. (2008). Acupuncture modulates 

resting state connectivity in default and sensorimotor brain networks.  Pain , 136 (3), 

407 –418. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pain.2008.01.011 

Du, J., Tripathi, V., Elliott, M. L., Ladopoulou, J., Sun, W., Eldaief, M. C., & Buckner, R. L. 

(2025a). Within -individual precision mapping of brain networks exclusively using task 

data.  Neuron , S0896627325006646. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2025.08.029 

Du, J., Tripathi, V., Elliott, M. L., Ladopoulou, J., Sun, W., Eldaief, M. C., & Buckner, R. L. 

(2025b). Within -individual precision mapping of brain networks exclusively using task 

data.  Neuron , S0896627325006646. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2025.08.029 

Dworetsky, A., Seitzman, B. A., Adeyemo, B., Neta, M., Coalson, R. S., Petersen, S. E., & 

Gratton, C. (2021). Probabilistic mapping of human functional brain networks 

identifies regions of high group consensus.  NeuroImage , 237 , 118164. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.10.731401 doi: bioRxiv preprint

34 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2021.118164 

Dworetsky, A., Seitzman , B. A., Adeyemo, B., Nielsen, A. N., Hatoum, A. S., Smith, D. M., 

Nichols, T. E., Neta, M., Petersen, S. E., & Gratton, C. (2024). Two common and 

distinct forms of variation in human functional brain networks.  Nature Neuroscience ,

27 (6), 1187 –1198. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593 -024 -01618 -2

Elliott, M. L., Knodt, A. R., Cooke, M., Kim, M. J., Melzer, T. R., Keenan, R., Ireland, D., 

Ramrakha , S., Poulton, R., Caspi, A., Moffitt, T. E., & Hariri, A. R. (2019). General 

functional connectivity: Shared features of resting -state and task fMRI drive reliable 

and heritable individual differences in functional brain networks.  NeuroImage , 189 ,

516 –532. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2019.01.068 

Elliott, M. L., Knodt, A. R., Ireland, D., Morris, M. L., Poulton, R., Ramrakha , S., Sison, M. L., 

Moffitt, T. E., Caspi, A., & Hariri, A. R. (2020). What Is the Test -Retest Reliability of 

Common Task -Functional MRI Measures? New Empirical Evidence and a Meta -

Analysis.  Psychological Science , 31 (7), 792 –806. 

https://doi.org/10.1177/0956797620916786 

Fair, D. A., Cohen, A. L., Power, J. D., Dosenbach, N. U. F., Church, J. A., Miezin, F. M., 

Schlaggar, B. L., & Petersen, S. E. (2009). Functional Brain Networks Develop from a 

“Local to Distributed” Organization.  PLoS Computational Biology , 5(5), e1000381. 

https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000381 

Finn, E. S., Shen, X., Scheinost, D., Rosenberg, M. D., Huang, J., Chun, M. M., 

Papademetris, X., & Constable, R. T. (2015). Functional connectome fingerprinting: 

Identifying individuals using patterns of brain connectivity.  Nature Neuroscience ,

18 (11), 1664 –1671. https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.4135 

Fox, M. D., & Raichle, M. E. (2007). Spontaneous fluctuations in brain activity observed with 

functional magnetic resonance imaging.  Nature Reviews Neuroscience , 8(9), 700 –

711. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn2201 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.10.731401 doi: bioRxiv preprint

35 

Fransson, P., Skiöld, B., Horsch, S., Nordell, A., Blennow, M., Lagercrantz, H., & Åden, U. 

(2007). Resting -state networks in the infant brain.  Proceedings of the National 

Academy of Sciences , 104 (39), 15531 –15536. 

https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0704380104 

Gao, W., Alcauter, S., Smith, J. K., Gilmore, J. H., & Lin, W. (2015). Development of human 

brain cortical network architecture during infancy.  Brain Structure and Function ,

220 (2), 1173 –1186. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00429 -014 -0710 -3

Gonzalez -Castillo, J., & Bandettini, P. A. (2018). Task -based dynamic functional connectivity: 

Recent findings and open questions.  NeuroImage , 180 , 526 –533. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2017.08.006 

Gordon, E. M., Laumann, T. O., Adeyemo, B., Huckins, J. F., Kelley, W. M., & Petersen, S. E. 

(2016). Generation and Evaluation of a Cortical Area Parcellation from Resting -State 

Correlations.  Cerebral Cortex , 26 (1), 288 –303. https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhu239 

Gordon, E. M., Laumann, T. O., Gilmore, A. W., Newbold, D. J., Greene, D. J., Berg, J. J., 

Ortega, M., Hoyt -Drazen, C., Gratton, C., Sun, H., Hampton, J. M., Coalson, R. S., 

Nguyen, A. L., McDermott, K. B., Shimony, J. S., Snyder, A. Z., Schlaggar, B. L., 

Petersen, S. E., Nelson, S. M., & Dosenbach, N. U. F. (2017). Precision Functional 

Mapping of Individual Human Brains.  Neuron , 95 (4), 791 -807.e7. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2017.07.011 

Graham, E. K., Weston, S. J., Gerstorf, D., Yoneda, T. B., Booth, T., Beam, C. R., Petkus, A. 

J., Drewelies, J., Hall, A. N., Bastarache, E. D., Estabrook, R., Katz, M. J., Turiano, 

N. A., Lindenberger, U., Smith, J., Wagner, G. G., Pedersen, N. L., Allema nd, M., 

Spiro, A., … Mroczek, D. K. (2020). Trajectories of Big Five Personality Traits: A 

Coordinated Analysis of 16 Longitudinal Samples.  European Journal of Personality ,

34 (3), 301 –321. https://doi.org/10.1002/per.2259 

Gratton, C., & Braga, R. M. (2026). Dense Phenotyping of Human Brain Network 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.10.731401 doi: bioRxiv preprint

36 

Organization Using Precision fMRI.  Annual Review of Psychology , 77 (1), 619 –647. 

https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev -psych -032825 -032920 

Gratton, C., Dworetsky, A., Coalson, R. S., Adeyemo, B., Laumann, T. O., Wig, G. S., Kong, 

T. S., Gratton, G., Fabiani, M., Barch, D. M., Tranel, D., Miranda -Dominguez, O., Fair, 

D. A., Dosenbach , N. U. F., Snyder, A. Z., Perlmutter, J. S., Petersen, S. E., & 

Campbell, M. C. (2020). Removal of high frequency contamination from motion 

estimates in single -band fMRI saves data without biasing functional connectivity. 

NeuroImage , 217 , 116866. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2020.116866 

Gratton, C., Laumann, T. O., Nielsen, A. N., Greene, D. J., Gordon, E. M., Gilmore, A. W., 

Nelson, S. M., Coalson, R. S., Snyder, A. Z., Schlaggar, B. L., Dosenbach , N. U. F., & 

Petersen, S. E. (2018). Functional Brain Networks Are Dominated by Stable Group 

and Individual Factors, Not Cognitive or Daily Variation.  Neuron , 98 (2), 439 -452.e5. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2018.03.035 

Gratton, C., Nomura, E. M., Pérez, F., & D’Esposito, M. (2012). Focal Brain Lesions to 

Critical Locations Cause Widespread Disruption of the Modular Organization of the 

Brain.  Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience , 24 (6), 1275 –1285. 

https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn_a_00222 

Grayson, D. S., & Fair, D. A. (2017). Development of large -scale functional networks from 

birth to adulthood: A guide to the neuroimaging literature.  NeuroImage , 160 , 15 –31. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2017.01.079 

Holmes, T. H., & Rahe, R. H. (1967). The social readjustment rating scale.  Journal of 

Psychosomatic Research , 11 (2), 213 –218. https://doi.org/10.1016/0022 -

3999(67)90010 -4

Honey, C. J., Sporns, O., Cammoun , L., Gigandet, X., Thiran, J. P., Meuli, R., & Hagmann, P. 

(2009). Predicting human resting -state functional connectivity from structural 

connectivity.  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 106 (6), 2035 –2040. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.10.731401 doi: bioRxiv preprint

37 

https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0811168106 

Horien, C., Shen, X., Scheinost, D., & Constable, R. T. (2019). The individual functional 

connectome is unique and stable over months to years.  NeuroImage , 189 , 676 –687. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2019.02.002 

Horovitz, S. G., Braun, A. R., Carr, W. S., Picchioni, D., Balkin, T. J., Fukunaga, M., & Duyn, 

J. H. (2009). Decoupling of the brain’s default mode network during deep sleep. 

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 106 (27), 11376 –11381. 

https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0901435106 

Hutchison, R. M., Womelsdorf, T., Allen, E. A., Bandettini, P. A., Calhoun, V. D., Corbetta , M., 

Della Penna, S., Duyn, J. H., Glover, G. H., Gonzalez -Castillo, J., Handwerker, D. A., 

Keilholz, S., Kiviniemi, V., Leopold, D. A., De Pasquale, F., Sporns, O., Walter, M., & 

Chang, C. (2013). Dynamic functional connectivity: Promise, issues, and 

int erpretations.  NeuroImage , 80 , 360 –378. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.05.079 

Jalbrzikowski , M., Liu, F., Foran, W., Klei, L., Calabro, F. J., Roeder, K., Devlin, B., & Luna, 

B. (2020). Functional connectome fingerprinting accuracy in youths and adults is 

similar when examined on the same day and 1.5 ‐years apart.  Human Brain Mapping ,

41 (15), 4187 –4199. https://doi.org/10.1002/hbm.25118 

Kong, R., Li, J., Orban, C., Sabuncu, M. R., Liu, H., Schaefer, A., Sun, N., Zuo, X. -N., 

Holmes, A. J., Eickhoff, S. B., & Yeo, B. T . T. (2019). Spatial Topography of Individual -

Specific Cortical Networks Predicts Human Cognition, Personality, and Emotion. 

Cerebral Cortex , 29 (6), 2533 –2551. https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhy123 

Kong, R., Yang, Q., Gordon, E., Xue, A., Yan, X., Orban, C., Zuo, X. -N., Spreng, N., Ge, T., 

Holmes, A., Eickhoff, S., & Yeo, B. T. T. (2021). Individual -Specific Areal -Level 

Parcellations Improve Functional Connectivity Prediction of Behavior.  Cerebral 

Cortex , 31 (10), 4477 –4500. https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhab101 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.10.731401 doi: bioRxiv preprint

38 

Ladwig, Z., Kermani, K. Z., Park, Y., Housteau, E., Dworetsky, A., Labora, N., Hernandez, J. 

J., Dorn, M., Smith, D. M., Nee, D. E., Petersen, S. E., Braga, R. M., & Gratton, C. 

(2026). Precision fMRI reveals densely interdigitated network patches with con served 

motifs in the lateral prefrontal cortex.  Neuron , S0896627326002801. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2026.04.011 

Larson -Prior, L. J., Power, J. D., Vincent, J. L., Nolan, T. S., Coalson, R. S., Zempel, J., 

Snyder, A. Z., Schlaggar, B. L., Raichle, M. E., & Petersen, S. E. (2011). Modulation 

of the brain’s functional network architecture in the transition from wake to  sleep. In 

Progress in Brain Research  (Vol. 193, pp. 277 –294). Elsevier. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/B978 -0-444 -53839 -0.00018 -1

Laumann, T. O., Gordon, E. M., Adeyemo, B., Snyder, A. Z., Joo, S. J., Chen, M. -Y., Gilmore, 

A. W., McDermott, K. B., Nelson, S. M., Dosenbach, N. U. F., Schlaggar, B. L., 

Mumford, J. A., Poldrack, R. A., & Petersen, S. E. (2015). Functional System and 

Are al Organization of a Highly Sampled Individual Human Brain.  Neuron , 87 (3), 657 –

670. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2015.06.037 

Laumann, T. O., Ortega, M., Hoyt, C. R., Seider, N. A., Siegel, J. S., Nguyen, A. L., Dierker, 

D. L., Coalson, R. S., Adeyemo, B., Marek, S., Gilmore, A. W., Nelson, S. M., 

Shimony, J. S., Greene, D. J., Raichle, M. E., Gordon, E. M., Petersen, S. E., 

Schl aggar, B. L., Snyder, A. Z., & Dosenbach, N. U. (2021). Brain network 

reorganisation in an adolescent after bilateral perinatal strokes.  The Lancet 

Neurology , 20 (4), 255 –256. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1474 -4422(21)00062 -4

Laumann, T. O., & Snyder, A. Z. (2021). Brain activity is not only for thinking.  Current Opinion 

in Behavioral Sciences , 40 , 130 –136. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cobeha.2021.04.002 

Lee, H. J., Dworetsky, A., Labora, N., & Gratton, C. (2025). Using precision approaches to 

improve brain -behavior prediction.  Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 29 (2), 170 –183. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2024.09.007 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.10.731401 doi: bioRxiv preprint

39 

Lurie, D. J., Kessler, D., Bassett, D. S., Betzel, R. F., Breakspear, M., Kheilholz , S., Kucyi, A., 

Liégeois, R., Lindquist, M. A., McIntosh, A. R., Poldrack, R. A., Shine, J. M., 

Thompson, W. H., Bielczyk, N. Z., Douw, L., Kraft, D., Miller, R. L., Muthuraman, M., 

Pasquini, L., … Calhoun, V. D. (2020). Questions and controversies in the  study of 

time -varying functional connectivity in resting fMRI.  Network Neuroscience , 4(1), 30 –

69. https://doi.org/10.1162/netn_a_00116 

Lynch, C. J., Elbau , I. G., Ng, T., Ayaz, A., Zhu, S., Wolk, D., Manfredi, N., Johnson, M., 

Chang, M., Chou, J., Summerville, I., Ho, C., Lueckel, M., Bukhari, H., Buchanan, D., 

Victoria, L. W., Solomonov, N., Goldwaser, E., Moia, S., … Liston, C. (2024). 

Frontostriatal sali ence network expansion in individuals in depression.  Nature ,

633 (8030), 624 –633. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586 -024 -07805 -2

Madden, D. J., Costello, M. C., Dennis, N. A., Davis, S. W., Shepler, A. M., Spaniol, J., 

Bucur, B., & Cabeza, R. (2010). Adult age differences in functional connectivity 

during executive control.  NeuroImage , 52 (2), 643 –657. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.04.249 

Marek, S., Donohue, M. R., Karcher, N. R., Hoyniak, C. P., Chauvin, R. J., Meyer, A. C., 

Miller, J., Van, A. N., Wang, A., Baden, N. J., Suljic, V., Scheidter, K. M., Monk, J., 

Whiting, F. I., Ramirez -Perez, N. J., Krimmel, S. R., Metoki , A., Paul, S. E., Gorelik, A. 

J., … Dosenbach, N. U. F. (2026). Patterns of brain -wide associations reflect 

socioeconomics.  Science , 392 (6803), eaee6213. 

https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aee6213 

Millevert, C., Vidas -Guscic, N., Adhikari, M. H., Miranda, A., Vanherp, L., Jonckers, E., Joye, 

P., Van Audekerke, J., Van Spilbeeck, I., Verhoye, M., Staelens, S., Bertoglio, D., & 

Weckhuysen , S. (2025). Tracking brain maturation in vivo: Functional connectivity, 

white matter integrity, and synaptic density in developing mice.  eBioMedicine , 115 ,

105720. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2025.105720 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.10.731401 doi: bioRxiv preprint

40 

Miranda -Dominguez, O., Mills, B. D., Carpenter, S. D., Grant, K. A., Kroenke, C. D., Nigg, J. 

T., & Fair, D. A. (2014). Connectotyping: Model Based Fingerprinting of the 

Functional Connectome.  PLoS ONE , 9(11), e111048. 

https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0111048 

Mitchell, T. J., Seitzman , B. A., Ballard, N., Petersen, S. E., Shimony, J. S., & Leuthardt, E. 

C. (2020). Human Brain Functional Network Organization Is Disrupted After Whole -

Brain Radiation Therapy.  Brain Connectivity , 10 (1), 29 –38. 

https://doi.org/10.1089/brain.2019.0713 

Newbold, D. J., Laumann, T. O., Hoyt, C. R., Hampton, J. M., Montez, D. F., Raut, R. V., 

Ortega, M., Mitra, A., Nielsen, A. N., Miller, D. B., Adeyemo, B., Nguyen, A. L., 

Scheidter, K. M., Tanenbaum, A. B., Van, A. N., Marek, S., Schlaggar , B. L., Carter, A. 

R., Greene, D. J., … Dosenbach, N. U. F. (2020). Plasticity and Spontaneous Activity 

Pulses in Disused Human Brain Circuits.  Neuron , 107 (3), 580 -589.e6. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2020.05.007 

Newport, E. L., Seydell -Greenwald, A., Landau, B., Turkeltaub, P. E., Chambers, C. E., 

Martin, K. C., Rennert, R., Giannetti, M., Dromerick, A. W., Ichord, R. N., Carpenter, 

J. L., Berl, M. M., & Gaillard, W. D. (2022). Language and developmental plasticit y

after perinatal stroke.  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 119 (42), 

e2207293119. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2207293119 

Nielsen, A. N., Greene, D. J., Gratton, C., Dosenbach, N. U. F., Petersen, S. E., & Schlaggar, 

B. L. (2019). Evaluating the Prediction of Brain Maturity From Functional Connectivity 

After Motion Artifact Denoising.  Cerebral Cortex , 29 (6), 2455 –2469. 

https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhy117 

Noble, S., Scheinost, D., & Constable, R. T. (2019). A decade of test -retest reliability of 

functional connectivity: A systematic review and meta -analysis.  NeuroImage , 203 ,

116157. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2019.116157 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.10.731401 doi: bioRxiv preprint

41 

Noble, S., Spann, M. N., Tokoglu, F., Shen, X., Constable, R. T., & Scheinost, D. (2017). 

Influences on the Test –Retest Reliability of Functional Connectivity MRI and its 

Relationship with Behavioral Utility.  Cerebral Cortex , 27 (11), 5415 –5429. 

https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhx230 

Nomura, E. M., Gratton, C., Visser, R. M., Kayser, A., Perez, F., & D’Esposito, M. (2010). 

Double dissociation of two cognitive control networks in patients with focal brain 

lesions.  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 107 (26), 12017 –12022. 

https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1002431107 

Ojemann, J. G., Akbudak, E., Snyder, A. Z., McKinstry, R. C., Raichle, M. E., & Conturo, T. E. 

(1997a). Anatomic Localization and Quantitative Analysis of Gradient Refocused 

Echo -Planar fMRI Susceptibility Artifacts.  NeuroImage , 6(3), 156 –167. 

https://doi.org/10.1006/nimg.1997.0289 

Ojemann, J. G., Akbudak, E., Snyder, A. Z., McKinstry, R. C., Raichle, M. E., & Conturo, T. E. 

(1997b). Anatomic Localization and Quantitative Analysis of Gradient Refocused 

Echo -Planar fMRI Susceptibility Artifacts.  NeuroImage , 6(3), 156 –167. 

https://doi.org/10.1006/nimg.1997.0289 

Park, H. -J., & Friston, K. (2013). Structural and Functional Brain Networks: From 

Connections to Cognition.  Science , 342 (6158), 1238411. 

https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1238411 

Petersen, S. E., & Sporns, O. (2015). Brain Networks and Cognitive Architectures.  Neuron ,

88 (1), 207 –219. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2015.09.027 

Pierce, J. E., Wig, G. S., Harp, N. R., & Neta, M. (2024). Resting -state functional network 

segregation of the default mode network predicts valence bias across the lifespan. 

Imaging Neuroscience , 2, imag –2–00403. https://doi.org/10.1162/imag_a_00403 

Poldrack, R. A., Laumann, T. O., Koyejo, O., Gregory, B., Hover, A., Chen, M. -Y., 

Gorgolewski, K. J., Luci, J., Joo, S. J., Boyd, R. L., Hunicke -Smith, S., Simpson, Z. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.10.731401 doi: bioRxiv preprint

42 

B., Caven, T., Sochat, V., Shine, J. M., Gordon, E., Snyder, A. Z., Adeyemo, B., 

Petersen, S. E., … Mumford, J. A. (2015). Long -term neural and physiological 

phenotyping of a single human.  Nature Communications , 6(1), 8885. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms9885 

Power, J. D., Cohen, A. L., Nelson, S. M., Wig, G. S., Barnes, K. A., Church, J. A., Vogel, A. 

C., Laumann, T. O., Miezin, F. M., Schlaggar, B. L., & Petersen, S. E. (2011). 

Functional Network Organization of the Human Brain.  Neuron , 72 (4), 665 –678. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2011.09.006 

Power, J. D., Mitra, A., Laumann, T. O., Snyder, A. Z., Schlaggar, B. L., & Petersen, S. E. 

(2014). Methods to detect, characterize, and remove motion artifact in resting state 

fMRI.  NeuroImage , 84 , 320 –341. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.08.048 

Preller, K. H., Duerler, P., Burt, J. B., Ji, J. L., Adkinson, B., Stämpfli, P., Seifritz, E., Repovš, 

G., Krystal, J. H., Murray, J. D., Anticevic, A., & Vollenweider, F. X. (2020). Psilocybin 

Induces Time -Dependent Changes in Global Functional Connectivi ty.  Biological 

Psychiatry , 88 (2), 197 –207. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2019.12.027 

Sami, S., & Miall, R. C. (2013). Graph network analysis of immediate motor -learning induced 

changes in resting state BOLD.  Frontiers in Human Neuroscience , 7.

https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2013.00166 

Satterthwaite, T. D., Wolf, D. H., Loughead, J., Ruparel, K., Elliott, M. A., Hakonarson, H., 

Gur, R. C., & Gur, R. E. (2012). Impact of in -scanner head motion on multiple 

measures of functional connectivity: Relevance for studies of neurodevelopment in 

yo uth.  NeuroImage , 60 (1), 623 –632. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.12.063 

Schaie, K. W., Willis, S. L., & Caskie, G. I. L. (2004). The Seattle Longitudinal Study: 

Relationship Between Personality and Cognition.  Aging, Neuropsychology, and 

Cognition , 11 (2 –3), 304 –324. https://doi.org/10.1080/13825580490511134 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.10.731401 doi: bioRxiv preprint

43 

Schone, H. R., Maimon -Mor, R. O., Kollamkulam, M., Szymanska, M. A., Gerrand, C., 

Woollard, A., Kang, N. V., Baker, C. I., & Makin, T. R. (2025). Stable cortical body 

maps before and after arm amputation.  Nature Neuroscience .

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593 -025 -02037 -7

Seitzman, B. A., Anandarajah, H., Dworetsky, A., McMichael, A., Coalson, R. S., Agamah, A. 

M., Jiang, C., Gu, H., Barbour, D. L., Schlaggar, B. L., Limbrick, D. D., Rubin, J. B., 

Shimony, J. S., & Perkins, S. M. (2023). Cognitive deficits and altered funct ional brain 

network organization in pediatric brain tumor patients.  Brain Imaging and Behavior ,

17 (6), 689 –701. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11682 -023 -00798 -y

Seitzman , B. A., Gratton, C., Laumann, T. O., Gordon, E. M., Adeyemo, B., Dworetsky, A., 

Kraus, B. T., Gilmore, A. W., Berg, J. J., Ortega, M., Nguyen, A., Greene, D. J., 

McDermott, K. B., Nelson, S. M., Lessov -Schlaggar, C. N., Schlaggar, B. L., 

Dosenbach, N. U.  F., & Petersen, S. E. (2019). Trait -like variants in human functional 

brain networks.  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 116 (45), 22851 –

22861. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1902932116 

Seitzman , B. A., Gratton, C., Marek, S., Raut, R. V., Dosenbach, N. U. F., Schlaggar, B. L., 

Petersen, S. E., & Greene, D. J. (2020). A set of functionally -defined brain regions 

with improved representation of the subcortex and cerebellum.  NeuroImage , 206 ,

116290. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2019.116290 

Seitzman, B. A., Reynoso, F. J., Mitchell, T. J., Bice, A. R., Jarang, A., Wang, X., Mpoy, C., 

Strong, L., Rogers, B. E., Yuede , C. M., Rubin, J. B., Perkins, S. M., & Bauer, A. Q. 

(2023). Functional network disorganization and cognitive decline following 

fractionated whole -brain radiation in mice.  GeroScience , 46 (1), 543 –562. 

https://doi.org/10.1007/s11357 -023 -00944 -w

Smith, S. M., Fox, P. T., Miller, K. L., Glahn, D. C., Fox, P. M., Mackay, C. E., Filippini, N., 

Watkins, K. E., Toro, R., Laird, A. R., & Beckmann, C. F. (2009). Correspondence of 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.10.731401 doi: bioRxiv preprint

44 

the brain’s functional architecture during activation and rest.  Proceedings of the 

National Academy of Sciences , 106 (31), 13040 –13045. 

https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0905267106 

Smyser, C. D., Inder, T. E., Shimony, J. S., Hill, J. E., Degnan, A. J., Snyder, A. Z., & Neil, J. 

J. (2010). Longitudinal Analysis of Neural Network Development in Preterm Infants. 

Cerebral Cortex , 20 (12), 2852 –2862. https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhq035 

Spreng, R. N., & Schacter, D. L. (2012). Default Network Modulation and Large -Scale 

Network Interactivity in Healthy Young and Old Adults.  Cerebral Cortex , 22 (11), 

2610 –2621. https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhr339 

Tagliazucchi, E., & Laufs, H. (2014). Decoding Wakefulness Levels from Typical fMRI 

Resting -State Data Reveals Reliable Drifts between Wakefulness and Sleep. 

Neuron , 82 (3), 695 –708. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2014.03.020 

Thomas Yeo, B. T., Krienen, F. M., Sepulcre, J., Sabuncu, M. R., Lashkari, D., Hollinshead, 

M., Roffman, J. L., Smoller, J. W., Zöllei , L., Polimeni, J. R., Fischl, B., Liu, H., & 

Buckner, R. L. (2011). The organization of the human cerebral cortex estimated by 

intrinsic functional connectivity.  Journal of Neurophysiology , 106 (3), 1125 –1165. 

https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.00338.2011 

Tuckute, G., Paunov, A., Kean, H., Small, H., Mineroff, Z., Blank, I., & Fedorenko, E. (2022). 

Frontal language areas do not emerge in the absence of temporal language areas: A 

case study of an individual born without a left temporal lobe.  Neuropsychologia , 169 ,

108184. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2022.108184 

Vinci -Booher, S., Ren, X., Kay, K., Yu, C., Pestilli, F., & Booth, J. R. (2025). Dense 

longitudinal neuroimaging reveals individual brain change trajectories.  Trends in 

Cognitive Sciences , S136466132500244X. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2025.09.005 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.10.731401 doi: bioRxiv preprint

45 

Supplementary Materi als 

Supp. Fig.  1. Network consensus and full timeline.  For each participant in the 

Standard Longitudinal Cohort, we mapped functional network  organization  at the 

individual level across multiple time points. The resulting consensus maps highlight 

vertices consistently assigned to the same network across  all  two  or  three  time 

points , wh ereas  inconsistent assignments are shown in gray. These maps reveal 

that network topography is remarkably stable within individuals over time  as the 

percentage s of consistent vertices show .

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.10.731401 doi: bioRxiv preprint

46 

Supp. Fig.  2. High er  functional connectivity similarity  within and  across time 

points  than  between  participant s. Volumetric ROI f unctional connectivity similarity 

between sessions  at the  two  most distant  time points  using  the  Standard 

Longitudinal  data. The gray dots represent  similarity  within participants  within  time 

point s (weekly comparisons) , the red dots represent comparisons within participants 

across  time points  (yearly comparisons) , and t he black dots represent comparisons 

between participants.  Although  weekly comparisons showed the  greatest  similarity 

(gray;  M = 0.7 9,  SD  = 0.05 ), yearly  comparisons yielded similarly high values  (red,  M

= 0.7 6, SD  = 0.0 6) and significantly exceeded  between -participant  similarity  (black 

dots,  M = 0.4 1, SD  = 0.06 ; permutation test  p = 0.0 02), confirming that functional 

connectivity patterns are uniquely individual. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.10.731401 doi: bioRxiv preprint

47 

Supp.  Fig . 3. Passage of time  explains a small amount of variance in  functional 

connectivity similarity . a)  Variance explained in a  fixed -effects  model  of between 

session similarity in functional connectivity , incorporating elapsed time,  signal quality, 

data quantity, and participant baseline . This model  accounted for a small proportion 

(29.4%)  of the total variance  of functional connectivity (FC) similarity . b) The high 

residual variance  (70.6%)  in panel  a can be explained by high baseline similarity in 

most  regions (Seitzman 300 atlas; shown as foci  with s ubcortical ROIs included in 

the analyses but omitted here from visualization for clarity ).  Across most regions, we 

observed remarkably high similarity (mean intercept  𝛽 0= 0.9 ; the intercept 

represents the predicted similarity when all predictors are held at their mean as we 

standardized the values; see  Methods ). c) The  variance explained  (𝜔 2) by  elapsed 

time was  small , supporting  our  hypothesis  that the passage of time had  only a subtle 

effect on  FC similarity. The omega -squared values for signal quality  (d) and data 

quantity  (e) were also near zero .

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.10.731401 doi: bioRxiv preprint

48 

Supp. Fig. 4.  Network stability hierarchy.  Network stability rank ordering of the 

Prolonged Longitudinal Cohort.  After generating vertex -wise functional connectivity 

similarity maps across time points within participants ( Fig. 2 b), correlation values 

were averaged within each network (with low -SNR regions censored). Network -level 

means were then averaged across participants and ranked from highest to lowest 

stability.  The  circle  indicates the mean  similarity within networks across participants 

with the solid lines showing 95% confidence interval. The ranking is highly similar to 

that of the Standard Longitudinal Cohort ( Fig. 6 ) where association networks tend ed 

to show higher stability than sensorimotor networks ( medial temporal  lobe  and 

temporal pole are also  association  networks,  but  they mostly overlap with low SNR 

regions ).

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.10.731401 doi: bioRxiv preprint

49 

Supp. Fig.  5. Network variants  and full timeline.  We defined network variants 

using bottom  10 % individual -to -group functional connectivity similarity threshold  at 

each time point . For each participant, the hemisphere displaying the most variants is 

shown.  The consensus maps  display  the overlap across time point (color scheme 

indicated in the Venn diagram).  While n etwork variants appear ed  in different  shapes, 

locations , and sizes  across participants , they highly overlap ped  within participants ,

even across time spans  exceeding  a decade. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.10.731401 doi: bioRxiv preprint

50 

Supp. Fig.  6. Network variant overlap across weeks and years.  Related to 

Figure  7, this plot illustrates the consistency of network variant locations, comparing 

sessions within weeks (same time point ; gray dots ) and across years (different time 

points ; red dots ) relative to between -participant similarity (black dots)  in the Standard 

Longitudinal Cohort. Binary maps of network variant locations were compared at  two 

time points using Dice coefficients.  Notably, although Dice overlap was highest 

across weeks  (M = 0.60,  SD  = 0.05) , as expected, it was comparably high across 

years  (M = 0.58,  SD  = 0.06) , and within -participant  yearly comparison s were 

significantly higher than between -participant comparisons  (M = 0.16,  SD  = 0.03) , p =

0.00 2 (permutation testing). Data amounts were matched, and v ertices within low -

SNR regions were excluded. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.10.731401 doi: bioRxiv preprint

51 

Supp. Fig.  7. Continuous spatial correlation maps of network variants . We 

showed in  Figure  7 and  Supplementary Figure  5 network variant  locations , using a 

threshold of below 10%.  This shows  the full spatial correlation of functional 

connectivity with an independent group template  (WU -120)  to capture continuous 

variation, providing a more nuanced view of consistency across time points . B lue 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.10.731401 doi: bioRxiv preprint

52 

areas , which  indicate spatial correlation s near zero or negative , appear ed  in 

consistent locations  across time points. 

.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.10.731401 doi: bioRxiv preprint 53 

Supp. Fig.  8. Stable network variant composition . As shown in  Figure  7 and 

Supplementary Figure  5, we display he re  the locations of network variants 

thresholded at the bottom 10% , but  each vertex is  also  color -coded based on  each 

participant’s template -matching network  map  (Figs.  2a and  3a). The consensus 

map s illustrate the network composition of stable variants  that  appear consistently in 

the same location across all time points.  Notably, the seemingly ectopic variants 

highlighted in  Figures  2a  and  3a are also evident here.