Title: Decoding Phonetic Features: Somatotopic and Sensorimotor Representations in Native and Non-native Consonant Perception

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.64898/2026.03.06.709780v2.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 36

Markdown Content:
1

Decoding  Phonetic  Features: 

Somatotopic  and  Sensorimotor  Representations  in  Native  and  Non -native  Consonant  Perception 

Tzuyi  Tseng 1, Simon  Thibault 2,  3,  4, Jennifer  Krzonowski 1, Mélanie  Canault 1,  5,

Alice  C.  Roy 1*,  Claudio  Brozzoli 6*,  Véronique  Boulenger 1* 

> 1

CNRS,  Université  Lyon  2,  Dynamique  du  Langage,  Lyon,  France  

> 2

Aix -Marseille  Université,  Marseille,  France  

> 3

Centre  de  Recherche  en  Psychologie  et  Neurosciences,  CNRS  UMR  7077,  Marseille,  France  

> 4

Institure  for  Language,  Communication  and  the  Brain,  Aix -en -Provence,  France  

> 5

Université  Lyon  1,  Villeurbanne,  France  

> 6

Integrative  Multisensory  Perception  Action  & Cognition  Team  (ImpAct),  Centre  de  Recherche  en 

Neurosciences  de  Lyon,  INSERM  U1028,  CNRS  UMR5292,  Université  Claude  Bernard  Lyon  1,  Lyon,  France 

* equal  contribution 

Keywords:  Speech  Perception,  Motor  Cortex,  Somatotopy,  Sensorimotor  Processing,  Phonetic  Features, 

Non -native  Phonemes,  fMRI,  MVPA,  RSA 

ABSTRACT 

Speech  perception  relies  on  the  integration  of  auditory  and  articulatory  information,  yet  the  precise  role  of 

motor  regions  remains  debated.  We  combined  behavioral  measures  and  fMRI  with  multivariate  pattern 

analyses  to  investigate  cortical  representations  of  nat ive  French  and  non -native  Mandarin  consonant 

perception  under  clear  and  noisy  conditions.  Cross -modal  classification  analysis  showed  that  articulatory 

features  of  perceived  degraded  native  bi labial  and  dental  consonants  are  mapped  somatotopically  in  right  lip 

and  tongue  motor  areas,  which  are  also  engaged  in  consonant  production.  These  representations  may  support 

phoneme  categorization  by  compensating  for  degraded  input.  Representational  similarity  analysis  further 

revealed  that  a network  encompassing  bilat eral  temporal  and  frontal  motor  regions  encodes  phonetic 

features  of  native  and  non -native  consonants,  including  place  and  manner  of  articulation.  Our  findings 

highlight  that  speech  perception  relies  on  embodied  sensorimotor  representations,  which  contribu te  to 

decoding  phonetic  features  both  within  and  across  languages. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.06.709780 doi: bioRxiv preprint

2

INTRODUCTION 

Scholars  have  long  debated  whether  speech  perception  primarily  involves  auditory -acoustic  or  articulatory -

acoustic  mechanisms.  According  to  the  auditory  account,  speech  sounds  are  decoded  from  spectrotemporal 

cues  in  the  acoustic  signal,  and  are  mainly  processed  within  the  auditory  temporal  cortices  (Diehl  et  al.,  2004; 

Hickok,  2014).  In  this  view,  the  neural  substrates  of  speech  perception  are  considered  functionally 

independe nt  from  speech  production  circuits.  In  contrast,  the  articulatory  view  ascribes  a central  role  of 

speech  production  processes  in  perception,  suggesting  that  phonetic  information  in  the  acoustic  signal  is 

perceived  as  the  articulatory  gestures  that  generate  those  speech  sounds  (see  the  motor  theory  of  speech 

perception;  Liberman  et  al.,  1967;  Liberman  & Mattingly,  1985,  1989).  Within  this  framework , speech 

perception  is  therefore  thought  to  rely,  at  least  in  part,  on  the  brain  motor  regions  underlying  speech 

production. 

Consistent  with  these  theoretical  accounts,  neuroimaging  studies  report  the  activity  of  both  auditory  and 

motor  cortical  areas  dur ing  speech  perception.  Functional  magnetic  resonance  imaging  (fMRI)  converges  in 

showing  that  this  process  primarily  engages  the  auditory  cortex,  particularly  the  bilateral  superior  temporal 

gyrus  and  sulcus  (STG  and  STS)  (Arsenault  & Buchsbaum,  2015;  Bont e et  al.,  2014;  Evans  & Davis,  2015; 

Fedorenko  et  al.,  2024).  In  parallel,  speech  perception  has  been  shown  to  activate  the  bilateral  motor  and 

premotor  (PMC)  cortices  (Skipper  et  al.,  2017;  Tseng  et  al.,  2025  for  a review ; Wilson  et  al.,  2004).  Notably, 

increased  premotor  activity  was  observed  for  correct  as  opposed  to  incorrect  phoneme  identification, 

highlighting  its  contribution  to  accurate  speech  decoding  (Callan  et  al.,  2010).  This  functional  role  is  further 

corroborated  by  studies  using  transcranial  magnetic  stimulation  (TMS),  showing  that  transiently  inhibiting  the 

left  primary  motor  cortex  (M1)  or  PMC  impairs  consonant  discrimination  and  identification  (Möttönen  &

Watkins,  2009;  Murakami  et  al.,  2015;  Sato  et  al.,  2009;  Skipper  et  al.,  2017;  Smalle  et  al.,  2015).  Conversely, 

stimulating  the  left  lip  and  tongue  motor  areas  facilitates  the  discrimination  of,  lip - and  tongue -articulated 

consonants,  respectively  (e.g.,  /b/  and  /d/;  D’Ausilio  et  al.,  2009).  This  somatotopic  correspondence  echoes 

Pulvermül ler  and  colleagues’  fMRI  findings  (2006)  that  passive  perception  of  bilabial  consonants  (e.g.,  /b/) 

activates  the  left  dorsal  precentral  gyrus  associated  with  lip  movements,  whereas  dental  consonant 

perception  (e.g.,  /d/)  recruits  its  ventral  part,  respons ible  for  tongue  movements. 

Beyond  such  somatotopically  organized  motor  activation,  multivariate  pattern  analyses  (MVPA)  also  indicate 

that  fine -grained  phonetic  features  are  encoded  across  motor,  somatosensory  and  auditory  cortices  during 

speech  perceptio n.  Phonetic  features,  such  as  place  and  manner  of  articulation,  specify  where  and  how  speech 

sounds  are  produced  in  the  vocal  tract  (Fuchs  & Birkholz,  2019).  Studies  on  consonant  perception  show  that 

neural  activity  patterns  in  the  pre - and  postcentral  gyr i (pre - and  post -CG)  enable  the  decoding  of  place  (e.g., 

labials  vs.  alveolars)  and  manner  (e.g.,  plosives  vs.  fricatives)  of  articulation  (Archila -Meléndez  et  al.,  2018; 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.06.709780 doi: bioRxiv preprint

3

Arsenault  & Buchsbaum,  2015;  Correia  et  al.,  2015;  Du  et  al.,  2014;  Evans  & Davis,  20 15).  These  neural  patterns 

therefore  support  the  processing  of  phonetic  features  requir ing  precise  spatial  and  temporal  coordination  of 

multiple  articulators.  Chevillet  and  colleagues  (2013)  reached  a similar  conclusion  using  an fMRI  rapid 

adaptation  parad igm,  in  which  participants  listened  to  paired  speech  stimuli  extracted  from  a place -of -

articulation  continuum  (/da/ -/ga/).  They  showed  that  the  PMC  selectively  responds  to  perceived  phoneme 

categories  – showing  reduced  activation  for  stimuli  within  the  sam e category  but  increased  activity  when  pairs 

cross  the  category  boundary  – whereas  auditory  temporal  regions  track  continuous  acoustic  variations  (e.g., 

sound  frequencies)  irrespective  of  category  (see  also  Dole  et  al.,  2022  for  congruent  findings  using  an fMRI 

repetition -suppression  paradigm  testing  a vowel  /i/ -/u/  continuum).  By  revealing  that  phonetic  features  are 

at  least  partially  encoded  in  motor  regions,  these  studies  support  contemporary  neurolinguistic  models 

emphasizing  the  sensorimotor  nature  of  speech  perception  and  the  importance  of  action -perception -

integration  processes  (Pulvermüller  & Fadiga,  2010,  2016;  Schomers  & Pulvermüller,  2016).  In  this  view,  the 

communicative  units  of  speech  are  neither  purely  auditory  nor  articulatory  but  rather  perc eptuo -motor, 

enabling  parity  between  speaker  and  listener  (Schwartz  et  al.,  2008,  2012).  This  account  highlights  tightly 

coupled  action -perception  interactions  that  give  rise  to  sensorimotor  speech  representations.  Accordingly, 

speech  perception  relies  on  complementary  contributions  from  both  auditory  and  motor  systems  (Laurent  et 

al.,  2017).  This  close  coupling  between  action  and  perception  is  consistent  with  embodied  theories  of 

cognition,  which  posit  that  language  is  grounded  in  sensory  and  motor  experie nce  (Barsalou,  2008;  Fischer  &

Zwaan,  2008;  Foglia  & Wilson,  2013;  Pulvermüller  & Fadiga,  2010,  2016).  Despite  the  accumulating  evidence 

for  combined  auditory  and  motor  involvement,  several  fMRI  studies  using  both  univariate  and  multivariate 

pattern  analys es  have  however  failed  to  find  motor  activity  during  speech  perception  (Szenkovits  et  al.,  2012) 

or  to  detect  somatotopic  activity  in  the  lip  and  tongue  motor  regions  during  the  perception  of  labial  and 

dental/alveolar  consonants  (Arsenault  & Buchsbaum,  20 16).  These  findings  have  been  taken  to  suggest  that 

motor  activity  during  speech  perception  may  reflect  task -related  cognitive  processes  rather  than  a direct 

contribution  to  decoding  native  speech.  Such  discrepancies  may  stem  from  methodological  difference s across 

studies,  including  the  absence  of  behavioral  measures  of  speech  recognition  and  variations  in  scanner  noise 

management  (Schomers  & Pulvermüller,  2016).  The  precise  functional  role  of  motor  cortex  activity  in  speech 

perception,  particularly  whether  it  contributes  to  speech  decoding  via  somatotopic  encoding  of  phonetic 

features,  therefore  remains  an  open  question. 

One  argument  in  favor  of  the  motor  system’s  functional  role  is  its  contribution  to  speech  decoding  under 

challenging  listening  conditions.  Indeed,  evidence  shows  that  motor  activation  is  enhanced  when  speech  input 

is  degraded  or  ambiguous.  In  a series  of  TMS  studies  targeting  the  left  lip  motor  area,  the  perception  of  motor -

distorted  syllables  – produced  with  a tongue  depressor  obstructing  lip  and  tongue  movements  for  lip - (e.g., 

/apa/)  or  tongue -articulated  (e.g.,  /ata/)  consonants  – evoked  larger  motor  potentials  than  the  perception  of 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.06.709780 doi: bioRxiv preprint

4

naturally -produced,  clear  syllables  without  any  distortion  (Nuttall  et  al.,  2016,  2017).  The  same  results  were 

found  when  naturally  produced  syllables  were  distorted  by  background  noise,  indicating  an  involvement  of 

the  motor  cortex  for  difficult  speech  perception,  whether  the  distortion  is  internal  (articulatory)  or  external 

(acoustic)  (Murakami  et  al.,  2011;  see  also  Nuttall  et  al.,  2017  for  an  effect  of  participants’  hearing  abilities). 

Notably,  such  motor  activity  to  degraded  speech  seems  to  outweigh  the  auditory  contribution.  As  a matter  of 

fact,  TMS -induced  improvement  in  the  identification  of  syllables  embedded  in  multi -talker  babble  was  larger 

after  stimulation  of  the  left  PMC  than  of  the  left  posterior  STS  (Brisson  & Tremblay,  2021).  When  tested  across 

different  signal -to -noise  ratios  (SNRs),  robust  motor  activations  were  furthermore  observed  only  at  hi gher 

SNRs,  when  speech  was  degraded  but  still  identifiable,  whereas  temporal  activity  decreased  under  these  same 

conditions  (Du  et  al.,  2014;  Osnes  et  al.,  2011).  In  addition,  MVPA  showed  that  for  phonemes  masked  by  white 

noise,  only  the  left  dorsal  PMC  an d M1  encoded  phonemic  information,  showing  similar  neural  patterns  for 

within -category  (e.g.,  two  exemplars  of  /ba/)  compared  to  between -category  phonemes  (e.g.,  /ba/  vs.  /da/). 

In  contrast,  the  encoding  of  intact  phonemes  recruited  a broader  network,  enco mpassing  the  bilateral  PMC, 

left  M1  and  inferior  frontal  gyrus  (IFG)  as  well  as  the  bilateral  posterior  superior  and  middle  temporal  gyri  (STG 

and  MTG)  (Du  et  al.,  2014).  These  findings  therefore  suggest  that  motor  regions  may  particularly  come  into 

play  to compensate  for  the  loss  of  auditory  clarity  during  degraded  speech  perception.  fMRI  evidence  remains 

however  limited  regarding  whether  this  motor  engagement  under  challenging  listening  conditions  reflects  the 

retrieval  of  embodied  articulatory  representa tions  in  the  motor  system. 

Another  approach  to  assess  speech  perception  under  challenging  conditions  involves  the  processing  of  non -

native  phonemes.  Unlike  degraded  native  speech,  non -native  speech  introduces  systematic  deviations  from 

the  listener’s  native  phonemes  while  preserving  overall  acoustic  clarity.  Understanding  how  the  auditory  and 

motor  systems  contribute  to  this  pro cess  is  particularly  important  given  the  increasing  need  to  learn  and 

master  foreign  language  in  daily  life.  Using  fMRI  univariate  approaches,  several  studies  have  reported  stronger 

activations  in  the  bilateral  STG  and  STS  and/or  (pre)motor  cortex  for  non -native  than  for  native  phoneme 

perception  (Callan  et  al.,  2014;  Wilson  & Iacoboni,  2006).  Consistently,  lip  motor  potentials  evoked  by  TMS 

over  the  left  motor  cortex  were  larger  when  perceiving  non -native  compared  to  native  vowels  (Schmitz  et  al., 

2019).  This  suggests  that  the  motor  system  may  compensate  for  the  lack  of  articulatory -acoustic 

representations  for  non -native  speech  sounds.  Along  this  line,  Japanese  native  speakers  showed  enhanced 

activity  in  the  bilateral  PMC  and  Broca’s  area  (IFG),  as  well  as  in  the  left  inferior  parietal  lobule,  STG  and  MTG, 

when  identifying  the  English  /ɹ/-/l/  contrast  which  is  typically  difficult  for  them  (Callan  et  al.,  2014).  Activity  in 

this  network  furthermore  correlated  with  behavioral  accuracy:  the  higher  the  identifi cation  accuracy  for  non -

native  consonants  the  stronger  the  associated  neural  response  (Callan  et  al.,  2004).  Interestingly,  increased 

PMC  and  IFG  activity  was  also  found  when  English  native  speakers  identified  the  same  English  consonants 

produced  with  a fo reign  accent  by  Japanese  speakers,  despite  the se  phonemes  belonging  to  their  native 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.06.709780 doi: bioRxiv preprint

5

language  (see  Adank  et  al.,  2015  for  a review  on  accented  speech  perception).  These  findings  support  the  idea 

that  motor  regions  facilitate  the  mapping  between  auditory  and  articulatory  representations  by  instantiating 

internal  forward  models  (Callan  et  al.,  2004;  Iacoboni,  2008;  Wilson  & Iacoboni,  2006;  see  also  Rauschecker  &

Scott,  2009),  especially  when  speech  perception  becomes  effortful.  Yet,  although  both  the  auditory  and  motor 

cortices  appear  to  be  activated  during  the  perception  of  degraded  native  and  intact  non -native  phonemes,  it 

remains  unclear  whether  motor  involvement  is  comparable  across  these  conditions. 

Overall,  fMRI  evidence  for  the  role  of  the  motor  system  during  speech  perception  remains  limited  and 

inconsistent.  In  particular,  whether  motor  activity  is  somatotopically  elicited  during  native  speech  perception 

is  still  debated  and  this  question  remains  largely  unexplored  in  the  context  of  non -native  speech.  Moreover, 

it  is  unclear  whether  and  how  sensorimotor  regions  encode  distinct  phonetic  features  both  within  and  across 

native  and  non -native  phonemes.  The  current  fMRI  study  directly  addresses  these  gaps  by  systematically 

investigating  neural  activity  patte rns  in  (pre)motor  and  auditory  temporal  regions  during  the  perception  of 

native  and  non -native  consonants  under  both  optimal  and  degraded  conditions.  Going  beyond  prior  work 

which  primarily  focused  on  intact  native  speech,  we  applied  fine -grained  MVPA  to  identify  shared  and 

condition -specific  neural  representations  across  languages  and  perceptual  conditions.  First,  we  assessed 

whether  consonant  perception  activates  motor  cortex  somatotopically  as  a function  of  consonant’  articulatory 

features.  Using  cross -modal  classification,  we  tested  whether  neural  patterns  associated  with  lip  and  tongue 

movements  predict  those  elicited  by  the  perception  of,  respectively,  bi labial  and  dental  consonants,  and 

whether  this  mapping  depends  on  language  and/or  listening  conditi ons.  Second,  we  examined  whether 

perceived  phonetic  features  such  as  place  and  manner  of  articulation  are  encoded  in  motor  and  auditory 

regions.  To  this  aim,  we  conducted  representational  similarity  analyses  (RSA;  Kriegeskorte  et  al.,  2008)  to 

determine  ho w observed  neural  patterns  align  with  theoretically  predicted  patterns  based  on  phonetic 

features,  both  within  and  across  the  native  and  non -native  languages. 

RESULTS 

Behavioral  categorization  performance 

Thirty -two  healthy,  right -handed  native  French  adu lts  participated  in  a combined  behavioral  and  fMRI  study 

featuring  native  (/p/,  /t/,  /ʃ/ and  /ʁ/)  and  non -native  (Mandarin)  consonants  (/pʰ/,  /tʰ/,  /ʂ/ and  /x/)  embedded 

in  consonant -vowel  (CV)  syllables.  These  consonants  were  selected  to  systematically  va ry  in  place  and  manner 

of  articulation,  as  well  as  in  laryngeal  features  (voicing  and  aspiration)  across  languages.  Place  (e.g.,  bilabials 

for  /p/  and  dentals  for  /t/)  and  manner  (e.g.,  plosives  /p/,  /t/,  /pʰ/,  /tʰ/  and  fricatives  /ʃ/,  /ʁ/,  /ʂ/,  /x/)  of 

ar ticulation  define  where  and  how  the  consonants  are  produced,  respectively.  Aspiration  corresponds  to  a

burst  of  air  at  consonant  release  (e.g.,  aspirated  /pʰ/  and  /tʰ/  compared  with  unaspirated  /p/  and  /t/),  whereas 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.06.709780 doi: bioRxiv preprint

6

voicing  refers  to  the  vibration  of  the  vocal  folds  (e.g.,  voiced  /ʁ/ versus  voiceless  /x/).  Participants  were 

instructed  to  listen  to  triplets  of  identical  syllables  (e.g.,  /pʰa  pʰa  pʰa/),  under  intact  or  noisy  perceptual 

conditions,  and  to  categorize  the  heard  consonant  as  native  or  non -native .

The  behavioral  results  revealed  that  participants  categorized  intact  consonants  significantly  better  than  noisy 

ones,  and  native  consonants  better  than  non -native  ones  (Figure  1).  This  was  confirmed  by  significant  main 

effects  of  noise  (F(1,  23)  = 27.87,  p < .001),  language  (F(1,  23)  = 8.51,  p = .008)  and  consonant  (F(3,  69)  = 73.62, 

p < .001)  in  a repeated  measures  ANOVA.  The  noise  × consonant  (F(3,  69)  = 4.83,  p = .004),  noise  × language 

(F(1,  23)  = 5.43,  p = .029),  consonant  x language  (F(3,  69)  = 37.3 2,  p < .001)  and  consonant  x language  x noise 

(F(3,  69)  = 10.62,  p < .001)  interactions  were  also  significant.  Tukey's  HSD  post -hoc  tests  showed  that  noise 

significantly  decreased  categorization  accuracy  for  the  native  bi labial  /p/  (p < .001),  both  relative  to  the  intact 

perceptual  condition  and  to  its  non -native  aspirated  counterpart  (/pʰ/;  p < .001).  For  the  fricatives,  participants 

performed  significantly  worse  for  the  non -native  retroflex  /ʂ/ than  for  the  native  post -alveolar  /ʃ/,  regardless 

of  the  perceptual  condition.  As  a matter  of  fact,  this  non -native  fricative,  whether  intact  or  noisy,  elicited 

significantly  lower  performance  than  all  other  consonants  (ps < .001). 

Figure  1.  Behavioral  categorization  accuracy  (mean  % of  correct  responses)  for  native  (/p/,  /t/,  /ʃ/,  /ʁ/ on  the 

left)  and  non -native  (/pʰ/,  /tʰ/,  /ʂ/,  /x/  on  the  right)  consonants  under  intact  (blue  unfilled  boxes)  and  noisy 

(grey  filled  boxes)  conditions.  Boxplot s indicate  the  middle  50%  (interquartile  range)  of  the  group  accuracy 

scores  in  each  condition,  spanning  from  the  first  quartile  (25th  percentile)  to  the  third  quartile  (75th 

percentile).  The  lines  extending  from  each  box  capture  data  points  outside  this  range,  covering  most  of  the 

remaining  25%  on  each  side,  with  dots  indicating  outliers.  The  horizontal  black  line  in  each  box  represents  the 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.06.709780 doi: bioRxiv preprint

7

mean  accuracy,  and  the  dashed  horizontal  line  shows  chance  level  (50%).  Asterisks  illustrate  significant 

differences  between  conditions  (*** p < .001):  black  asterisks  indicate  differences  between  intact  and  noisy 

conditions  for  each  consonant,  whereas  blue  and  grey  asterisks  denote  differences  between  native  and  non -

native  consonants  (/p/ -/pʰ/,  /t/ -/tʰ/,  /ʃ/-/ʂ/ and  /ʁ/-/x/)  in  the  intact  and  noisy  conditions,  respectively. 

Articulatory  patterns  during  production  predict  perceptual  ones  in  the  motor  cortex 

Our  univariate  analyses  showed  robust  activation  of  both  auditory  and  (pre)motor  cortices  during  consonant 

categoriz ation  across  all  language  and  perceptual  conditions  (see  Supplemental  information  (SI),  Figure  S1  and 

Table  S1).  In  particular,  we  found  stronger  right  precentral  activity  for  non -native  compared  to  native 

consonants,  irrespective  of  noise,  whereas  categor ization  of  intact  compared  to  noisy  consonants  elicited 

stronger  activity  in  the  STG,  regardless  of  language  (Figure  S2).  The  corresponding  reverse  contrasts  did  not 

yield  any  significant  clusters  in  either  case.  In  addition,  the  better  participants  were  at categorizing  consonants 

in  their  native  language,  the  stronger  the  right  precentral  activity . Better  non -native  consonant  categorization 

was  instead  associated  with  greater  left  inferior  frontal  activity  (Figure  S3). 

We  next  assessed  whether  articulatory  features  are  somatotopically  encoded  in  the  motor  cortex  and 

recruited  during  consonant  perception,  by  testing  whether  neural  activation  patterns  associated  with 

articulatory  movements  predict  those  elicited  during  consonant  perception.  To  this  end,  a cla ssifier  was 

trained  to  distinguish  the  neural  patterns  elicited  by  lip  and  tongue  movements  (i.e.  within -modal 

classification)  and  then  tested  to  classify  those  elicited  by  the  perception  of  bi labial  and  dental  consonants  in 

the  native  and  non -native  langu ages,  under  intact  and  noisy  conditions  (i.e.  cross -modal  classification). 

Classification  analyses  were  performed  within  individual  precentral  regions -of -interest  (ROIs)  in  both 

hemispheres  defined  from  the  articulatory  localizer  task  (see  Methods ).  We  hyp othesized  that  a classifier 

trained  on  movement  patterns  would  successfully  decode  perception  patterns  for  consonants  sharing  the 

same  articulatory  features,  especially  under  degraded  listening  conditions. 

The  within -modal  classifier  significantly  discrim inated  the  lip  and  tongue  motor  patterns  within  bilateral 

precentral  ROIs  (FDR -corrected  p < .001),  with  high  group  mean  accuracy  (93%,  SD  = 12.0  in  the  left 

hemisphere  and  95%,  SD  = 12.7  in  the  right,  Figure  2 left  panel).  Crucially,  cross -modal  classific ation  revealed 

that  neural  patterns  elicited  by  the  perception  of  native  bi labials  and  dentals  (i.e.  /p/  and  /t/,  respectively)  in 

the  noisy  condition  were  successfully  distinguished  by  the  motor  classifier  within  the  right  precentral  ROI 

(mean  accuracy  60 %,  SD  = 13.7,  FDR -corrected  p < .01;  Figure  2 right  panel).  To  confirm  the  specificity  of  this 

effect,  we  conducted  a control  analysis  using  the  same  classifier  to  decode  the  neural  patterns  elicited  by  the 

perception  of  coronal  (/ ʃ/,  /ʂ/)  and  dorsal  frica tives  (/ ʁ/,  /x/),  which  do  not  rely  on  corresponding  lip  and 

tongue  articulatory  features.  As  expected,  classification  performance  did  not  significantly  exceed  chance  for 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.06.709780 doi: bioRxiv preprint

8

these  fricatives  (Figure  S5),  confirming  that  the  observed  cross -modal  decoding  refle cts  the  activations  of 

articulator -specific  motor  representations  rather  than  general  consonant  discrimination. 

Figure  2.  MVPA  classification  accuracy  of  motor  activation  patterns  (within  modality,  first  two  blue  boxplots 

on  the  left)  for  lip  and  tongu e articulatory  movements,  and  cross -modal  pattern  classification  (the  rest  8

boxplots  on  the  right)  for  native  and  non -native  bi labial  and  dental  consonant  perception  in  the  intact  and 

noisy  conditions.  For  each  condition,  the  first  boxplot  shows  the  mean  classifier  accuracy  in  the  precentral  ROI 

of  the  left  hemisphere  (LH,  light  blue  unfilled  boxes);  the  second  one  shows  the  accuracy  in  its  counterpart  in 

the  right  hemisphere  (RH,  dark  blue  filled  boxes).  The  black  horizontal  line  in  each  box  indicates  the  group 

mean  accuracy  for  the  corresponding  condition.  Asterisks  (** p < .01;  *** p < .001)  indicate  statistical 

significance  in  the  one -sample  t-test  against  chance  level  (50%,  dashed  line)  with  FDR  correction  for  multiple 

comparisons  across  the  four  conditi ons  in  the  two  hemispheres. 

Sensorimotor  encoding  of  phonetic  features 

To  further  study  the  neural  encoding  of  phonetic  features,  namely  whether  and  how  perceived  phonetic 

features  are  represented  in  sensorimotor  cortices,  we  conducted  representational  similarity  analyses  (RSA) 

using  a searchlight  approach  constrained  to  a se t of  seven  predefined  ROIs  (see  Methods ; see  Correia  et  al., 

2015  for  a similar  approach).  These  ROIs  (see  shaded  grey  areas  in  Figure  S6)  are  known  to  be  involved  in 

speech  processing  (Archila -Meléndez  et  al.,  2018;  Arsenault  & Buchsbaum,  2015;  Correia  et  al.,  2015;  Du  et 

al.,  2014;  Evans  & Davis,  2015 ). The  aim  of  these  RSA  analyses  was  to  identify  cortical  regions  in  which 

consonants  sharing  the  same  phonetic  features  elicit  similar  neural  activity  patterns,  irrespective  of  language 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.06.709780 doi: bioRxiv preprint

9

(native  or  non -native ) and  perceptual  conditions  (intact  or  noisy).  Neural  representational  dissimilarity 

matrices  (RDMs)  captured  the  similarity  observed  between  the  neural  activity  patterns  within  the  ROIs  that 

were  elicited  by  each  perceived  consonant.  These  empirical  RDMs  were  then  correlated  with  theoretical  RDMs 

modelling  the  predicted  similarity  between  consonants  based  on  the  four  phonetic  features:  place  of 

articulation  (Figure  3A),  manner  of  articulation  (Figure  3B),  aspiration  (Figure  3C)  and  voicing  (Figure  3D;  see 

Methods ).  A high  correlation  between  neural  observed  and  predicted  RDMs  indicates  that  neural  activity 

patterns  within  a given  cortical  region  encode  the  phonetic  feature  of  interest. 

Figure  3.  Theoretical  feature -based  RDMs  predicting  the  similarity  of the  neural  patterns  for  (A)  place  of 

articulation,  (B)  manner  of  articulation,  (C)  aspiration  and  (D)  voicing.  Each  tile  represents  the  hypothesized 

similarity/dissimilarity  between  the  neural  activity  patterns  for  two  consonants,  in  the  intact  native,  noisy 

native,  intact  non -native  and  noisy  non -native  conditions.  Red  tiles  express  increased  similarity  (with  a value 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.06.709780 doi: bioRxiv preprint

10 

of  -1,  i.e.  decreased  dissimilarity);  blue  tiles  express  decreased  similarity  (with  a value  of  1,  i.e.  increased 

dissimilarity);  green  tile s express  non -relevant  associations  (with  N/A  values,  see  Evans  & Davis,  2015). 

As  shown  in  Figure  4,  consonants  sharing  the  same  place  of  articulation  (yellow  clusters)  elicited  similar  neural 

patterns  within  a distributed  bilateral  network  encompassing  the  pre - and  post -CG,  insula,  STG  and  MTG  as 

well  as  the  right  IFG.  Encoding  of  these  features  was  more  focal  in  the  left  hemisphere,  particularly  within 

dorsal  motor  and  superior  temporal  areas,  while  it  was  more  widely  distributed  across  the  right  sensor imotor 

regions  (see  also  Figure  S6A  and  Table  S2).  For  manner  of  articulation  (green  clusters  in  Figure  4;  Figure  S6B), 

clusters  were  distributed  bilaterally  in  a network  largely  overlapping  with  that  identified  for  place  of 

articulation  and  including  the  dorsal  pre -CG,  IFG,  insula,  STG  and  MTG.  Compared  with  place  of  articulation, 

manner  of  articulation  was  associated  with  stronger  and  more  focal  involvement  of  the  bilateral  insula  and 

the  right  anterior  superior  temporal  cortex,  along  with  notable  extensi on  to  the  left  anterior  and  posterior 

temporal  cortex  compared  to  place  of  articulation.  Encoding  of  aspiration  was  more  spatially  restricted,  with 

a single  cluster  in  the  right  dorsal  pre -CG  (red  cluster  in  Figure  4;  Figure  S6C).  Finally,  clusters  encodin g voicing 

were  primarily  located  in  the  left  hemisphere,  covering  the  ventral  pre -CG  and  IFG,  as  well  as  the  bilateral  STG 

and  the  right  posterior  MTG  (purple  clusters  in  Figure  4;  Figure  S6D).  Overall,  these  findings  show  that 

consonants’  phonetic  feature s are  encoded  within  a network  spanning  both  motor  and  auditory  regions  across 

the  left  and/or  right  hemispheres,  with  consistent  involvement  of  the  precentral  gyrus  and  the  superior  and 

middle  temporal  gyri  across  languages  and  perceptual  conditions. 

Figure  4.  Searchlight  RSA  brain  maps  displaying  the  overlap  of  neural  activity  patterns  associated  with  the  four 

phonetic  features  of  interest  during  consonant  perception.  Brain  maps  show  the  significant  clusters  after 

permutation  testing  thresholded  at  p < .05  (FDR -corrected)  with  a minimum  cluster  size  of  780  mm 3. Colors 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.06.709780 doi: bioRxiv preprint

11 

indicate  the  examined  phonetic  features:  yellow  for  place  of  articulation,  green  for  manner  of  articulation,  red 

for  aspiration  and  purple  for  voicing. 

To  better  characterize  these  phone tic  representations,  we  tested  whether  speech  sounds  are  encoded 

primarily  in  sensory,  motor,  or  sensorimotor  regions,  and  whether  such  encoding  shows  hemispheric 

dominance,  by  assess ing  the  relative  contributions  of  bilateral  auditory  and  motor  regions  to  phonetic  feature 

encoding.  We  conducted  a repeated -measures  ANOVA  on  Spearman’s  rho  values  extracted  from  the  voxels  in 

the  left  and  right  STG  and  pre -CG  that  showed  significantly  simila r neural  patterns  for  consonants  sharing  the 

same  phonetic  features.  Because  significant  RSA  patterns  for  aspiration  (red  cluster  in  Figure  4)  and  voicing 

(purple  clusters  in  Figure  4)  were  only  observed  in  only  a single  hemisphere  or  ROI  (e.g.,  aspiration  was 

encoded  only  in  the  right  pre -CG),  these  features  were  excluded  from  the  ANOVA.  This  analysis  thus  included 

rho  values  for  place  and  manner  of  articulation  only,  which  showed  significant  RSA  patterns  across  all  ROIs 

and  both  hemispheres.  Three  factors  were  included:  Phonetic  Feature  (place  vs.  manner),  ROI  (STG  vs.  pre -

CG),  and  Hemisphere  (left  vs.  right)  to  test  whether  representational  similarity  differed  across  cortical  regions 

and  hemispheres. 

The  repeated -measures  ANOVA  revealed  significant  main  effects  of  Hemisphere  (F(1,23)  = 9.94,  p = .004)  and 

ROI  (F(1,23)  = 12.06,  p = .002),  as  well  as  a significant  Hemisphere  x ROI  interaction  (F(1,23)  = 10.48,  p = .004). 

Post -hoc  paired  t-tests  comparing  the  correlation  values  in  the  two  hemispheres  within  each  ROI,  showed 

significantly  higher  values  in  the  right  STG  than  the  left  STG  (t(23)  = -3.57,  p = .002).  This  indicates  that  right 

temporal  regions  were  more  engaged  in  processing  place  and  manner  of  articulation  than  their  left 

counterparts.  No  such  int er -hemispheric  difference  was  observed  in  the  precentral  regions.  We  then 

compared  correlation  values  between  the  two  ROIs  within  each  hemisphere.  Only  the  right  hemisphere 

showed  significantly  greater  values  in  the  STG  than  in  the  pre -CG  (t(23)  = -3.15,  p = .005).  This  suggests  that 

the  right  superior  temporal  cortex  encoded  the  two  phonetic  features  more  strongly  than  the  right  motor 

cortex.  In  contrast,  no  significant  difference  was  observed  between  STG  and  pre -CG  in  the  left  hemisphere. 

In  summary,  the  RSA  results  reveal  that  perceived  phonetic  features  distinguishing  consonants,  both  within 

and  across  languages,  are  primarily  encoded  in  both  sensory  and  motor  regions  of  the  two  hemispheres. 

Notably,  features  such  as  place  and  manner  of  articulation  wer e found  to  be  represented  to  a similar  extent 

in  auditory  and  motor  cortices  in  the  left  hemisphere,  whereas  in  the  right  hemisphere,  encoding  showed  an 

auditory  advantage. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.06.709780 doi: bioRxiv preprint

12 

DISCUSSION 

In  this  study,  we  combined  behavioral  and  fMRI  approaches  to  investig ate  the  neural  coding  of  perceived 

consonants  in  native  and  non -native  languages,  under  both  optimal  and  degraded  listening  conditions.  A key 

finding  is  that  the  right  motor  cortex  maps  articulatory  features  of  degraded  native  speech  sounds  in  a

somatotopi c manner:  motor  activation  patterns  associated  with  lip  and  tongue  articulatory  movements 

closely  mirror  those  elicited  by  the  perception  of  bi labial  and  dental  consonants  masked  by  noise,  respectively. 

Moreover,  using  RSA,  we  show  that  phonetic  features  distinguishing  consonants  – within  and  across  native 

and  non -native  languages  – are  encoded  in  a distributed  network  encompassing  bilateral  motor  and  auditory 

cortices,  supporting  the  view  that  both  systems  contribute  to  speech  perception. 

Our  fMRI  univariate  analyses  first  confirmed  that  both  auditory  and  motor  regions  are  engaged  during  speech 

perception  (Figure  S1).  Importantly,  motor  activity  was  modulated  by  behavioral  performance:  better 

categorization  accuracy  for  native  consonants  wa s associated  with  stronger  precentral  activation  (Figure  S3A, 

see  also  Figure  S4).  These  findings  support  the  idea  that  accurate  phoneme  perception  benefits  from  the 

activation  of  articulatory  gesture  representations , echoing  previous  evidence  for  the  func tional  role  of  motor 

regions  in  successful  phoneme  identification  (e.g.,  Callan  et  al.,  2010;  Alho  et  al.,  2014).  Enhanced  motor 

activity  did  not,  however,  systematically  translate  into  better  behavioral  performance.  In  fact,  motor  activity 

was  stronger  fo r non -native  than  for  native  consonants  (Figure  S2A),  despite  overall  lower  categorization 

accuracy  for  the  former.  This  pattern  of  performance  was  especially  observed  for  the  retroflex  fricative  /ʂ/, 

which  is  not  part  of  the  native  (French)  phonological  inventory.  According  to  the  Perceptual  Assimilation 

Model  (PAM,  Best,  1994;  Best  et  al.,  2001),  such  difficulties  arise  when  non -native  contrasts  rely  on 

articulatory  features  that  are  not  represented  in  the  listener’s  native  repertoire,  as  in  the  case  of  tongue 

retroflection  here.  Interestingly,  participants  were  able  to  accurately  categorize  non -native  aspirated 

consonants  (i.e.  /pʰ/  and  /tʰ/)  despite  aspiration  does  not  constitute  a phonemic  contrast  with  their 

unaspirated  counterparts  in  French  (i.e.  /p/  and  /t/).  Under  degraded  conditions,  aspirated  (non -native) 

plosives  were  even  categorized  more  accurately  than  un aspirated  (native)  consonants  (see  Liang  et  al.,  2023 

for  converging  findings).  This  may  be  explained  by  the  greater  perceptual  salience  of  voice -onset -time  (VOT) 

cues  for  aspirated  compared  to  unaspirated  consonants  (Table  S3),  which  likely  facilitates  discrimination 

between  the  two , especially  when  consonants  share  the  same  place  of  articulation  (i.e.  bilabial  for  /p/  and 

/pʰ/,  and  dental  fo r /t/  and  /tʰ/  here).  Taken  together,  these  findings  suggest  a dissociation  between  native 

and  non -native  speech  processing.  While  native  consonants  show  a close  match  between  accuracy  and  motor 

involvement,  for  non -native  consonants,  stronger  motor  activi ty  is  not  associated  with  better  behavioral 

performance . This  activity  may  instead  reflect  the  engagement  of  internal  forward  models  attempting, 

unsuccessfully,  to  simulate  articulatory  gestures  that  are  absent  from  the  listener’s  native  motor  repertoire 

(Callan  et  al.,  2004;  Rauschecker  & Scott,  2009;  Wilson  & Iacoboni,  2006).  Such  motor  recruitment  is  also 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.06.709780 doi: bioRxiv preprint

13 

consistent  with  studies  suggesting  that  motor  activity  may  compensate  for  less  efficient  temporal  auditory 

processing  under  challenging  perceptual  cond itions  (Du  et  al.,  2014;  Laurent  et  al.,  2017 ; Schmitz  et  al.  2019; 

Osnes  et  al.,  2011). 

Building  on  these  univariate  and  behavioral  findings,  we  next  discuss  the  multivariate  analyses  addressing  how 

phonetic  features  are  represented  in  sensorimotor  region s.  These  results  may  further  inform  current  theories 

of  speech  perception  and  provide  insights  into  the  embodied  and  cross -linguistic  processing  of  perceived 

phonetic  features. 

Somatotopic  representations  of  perceived  articulatory  features  in  the  motor  co rtex 

Whether  motor  regions  are  somatotopically  activated  during  consonant  perception  as  a function  of  their 

articulatory  features  remains  unclear,  with  mixed  results  in  the  literature  (Arsenault  & Buchsbaum,  2016; 

Pulvermüller  et  al.,  2006;  Schomers  & Pul vermüller,  2016;  Szenkovits  et  al.,  2012).  Here,  we  provide  new 

evidence  that  perceived  phonetic  features  are  mapped  onto  their  corresponding  articulatory  representations 

within  the  motor  cortex.  Using  a multivariate  approach,  a cross -modal  classifier  trai ned  on  motor  activation 

patterns  elicited  by  articulatory  lip  and  tongue  movements,  successfully  decoded  neural  activity  in  the  right 

precentral  gyrus , evoked  by  the  perception  of  degraded  native  bi labial  and  dental  plosive  consonants, 

respectively.  Crucia lly,  this  effect  was  selective  and  depended  on  the  articulatory  features  of  the  consonants. 

Decoding  succeeded  for  bi labial  and  dental  plosives  (/p/  and  /t/) , which  involve  a complete  closure  and  clearly 

distinct  effectors  (lips  vs.  tongue,  respectively) , but  failed  for  coronal  and  dorsal  fricatives  (/ʃ/ and  /ʁ/), which 

rely  on  lingual  constriction  without  full  closure.  Moreover,  fricatives  involve  articulatory  configurations  that 

are  less  well  aligned  with  those  used  to  train  the  classifier  (i.e.  bilabial  /m/  and  dental  /l/) . The  tongue  gestures 

involved  in  the  production  of  these  consonants  differ  in  their  degree  of  overlap  with  the  learned  motor 

patterns.  Specifically,  dental  plosives  (/t/)  share  a close r place -of -articulation  configuratio n with  the  produced 

approximant  /l /, than  fricatives,  which  involve  more  posterior  and  constricted  tongue  shaping.  This  proximity 

may  explain  the  successful  decoding  observed  only  for  plosives.  Overall,  these  findings  indicate  that 

articulatory  representat ions  are  recruited  during  speech  perception  in  an  effector -specific  manner  and  that 

this  production -perception  overlap  is  constrained  by  fine -grained  articulatory  correspondence . Importantly, 

successful  cross -modal  decoding  was  observed  only  for  native  con sonants  that  were  masked  by  noise . These 

findings  highlight  two  key  points:  first,  motor  system  activity  supports  language  embodiment  at  the  phonetic 

level  for  native  speech  sounds  (Pulvermüller  & Fadiga,  2010 , 2016;  Pulvermüller  et  al.,  2006);  second,  mot or 

engagement  is  specifically  enhanced  under  challenging  perceptual  conditions  (Callan  et  al.,  2004;  D’Ausilio  et 

al.,  2009,  2012;  Du  et  al.,  2014;  Evans  & Davis,  2015). 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.06.709780 doi: bioRxiv preprint

14 

The  successful  classification  of  lip - and  tongue -articulated  consonants  in  the  right  motor  cortex  suggests 

somatotopic  mapping  of  articulatory  features  across  speech  production  and  perception,  in  line  with 

Pulvermüller  et  al.’s  findings  (2006).  Their  univariate  fMRI  results  indeed  revealed  a double  dissociation  within 

motor  articulatory  re gions  during  consonant  perception:  passive  listening  to  dental  consonants  preferentially 

activated  the  tongue  motor  area  over  the  lip  area,  while  the  reverse  was  observed  for  labial  consonants  (see 

also  Dmitrieva  et  al.,  2025  for  converging  findings  during  intact  word  comprehension).  Our  multivariate  results 

offer  further  support  for  this  somatotopic  mapping  by  demonstrating  that  motor  regions  underlying 

consonant  production  can  decode  the  neural  patterns  elicited  by  consonant  perception  depending  on  their 

phonetic  features,  at  least  in  the  native  language  and  when  speech  is  degraded.  This  motor  activity  likely 

supplements  impoverished  auditory  input  by  retrieving  articulatory  representations  from  the  native  motor 

repertoire  (Callan  et  al.,  2004;  Rauschecker  & Scott,  2009),  thereby  supporting  speech  decoding  through 

shared  neural  circuits  for  perception  and  production  (Dmitrieva  et  al.,  2025;  Pulvermüller  & Fadiga,  2010, 

2016;  Pulvermüller  et  al.,  2006).  In  contrast,  when  the  auditory  signal  is  intact,  relian ce  on  motor  regions 

appears  reduced.  The  lack  of  successful  decoding  for  intact  native  consonants  may  reflect  weaker  and  less 

consistent  motor  engagement  when  speech  identification  is  relatively  easy  (see  D’Ausilio  et  al.,  2012  for 

congruent  findings).  Thi s interpretation  is  consistent  with  our  univariate  analyses,  which  revealed  greater 

activity  in  bilateral  superior  temporal  areas  when  consonant  categorization  occurred  under  easier  perceptual 

conditions  (intact  vs.  noisy;  Figure  S3B).  Taken  together,  thes e findings  reinforce  the  idea  that  temporal 

auditory  processing  may  predominate  when  the  speech  signal  is  clear,  whereas  motor  contributions  become 

increasingly  important  for  speech  decoding  under  challenging  listening  conditions  (see  also  Laurent  et  al., 

2017;  Moulin -Frier  et  al.,  2012). 

Previous  inconsistent  reports  of  somatotopically  organized  motor  engagement  during  intact  native  speech 

perception  (Arsenault  & Buchsbaum,  2016;  Dmitrieva  et  al.,  2025;  Pulvermüller  et  al.,  2006)  may  reflect 

methodologica l differences  across  studies  (see  Schomers  & Pulvermüller,  2016  for  a discussion ).  In  particular, 

variability  in  noise  control  may  have  affected  speech  intelligibility  and  the  degree  of  motor  involvement  across 

SNRs  (Du  et  al.,  2014;  Osnes  et  al.,  2011),  leaving  it  unclear  whether  inconsistent  somatotopic  motor  activity 

reflected  true  auditory -dominant  speech  processing.  Our  findings  demonstrate  that  motor  activity  specifically 

supports  accurate  consonant  categorization  (Figures  S3A,  S4)  when  scanner  noise  interference  is  minimized 

during  auditory  stimulus  presentation.  Accordingly,  the  absence  of  successful  decoding  for  non -native  speech 

sounds  may  be  explained  by  two  complementary  factors.  Behavioral  results  indicate  that  aspiration  cues  in 

non -native  plos ives  provided  the  primary  information  supporting  accurate  categorization,  even  in  the 

presence  of  noise.  Reliance  on  this  non -native  phonetic  feature  may  however  obscure  the  contribution  of  the 

corresponding  articulatory  effectors  (i.e.,  lip  and  tongue  in  this  case),  thereby  preventing  observable 

somatotopic  activation  in  the  precentral  gyri.  Indeed,  our  univariate  analyses  suggest  that  the  successful 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.06.709780 doi: bioRxiv preprint

15 

categorization  of  non -native  consonants  may  instead  rely  on  the  left  IFG,  as  indicated  by  the  correlation 

between  activity  in  this  region  and  behavioral  accuracy  (Figure  S4).  Such  IFG  activity  may  compensate  for 

articulatory  features  that  are  insufficiently  specified  in  the  precentral  areas. 

Altogether,  our  findings  support  a functional  role  of  the  motor  syste m in  speech  perception , in  line  with 

embodied  cognition  frameworks  (Pulvermüller  & Fadiga,  2010,  2016)  and  models  based  on  forward  internal 

predictions  (Callan  et  al.,  2004;  Rauschecker  & Scott,  2009).  We  propose  that  distinct  articulatory  features  are 

embodied  in  the  listener's  native  motor  repertoire  and  may  contribute  to  resolving  degraded  or  ambiguous 

speech  signals. 

Encoding  of  phonetic  features  in  auditory  and  motor  regions 

We  fu rther  investigated  how  phonetic  features,  namely  place  and  manner  of  articulation,  aspiration,  and 

voicing,  are  represented  in  speech -related  brain  regions.  Using  an  RSA  approach,  we  captured  the  neural 

patterns  reflecting  modeled  similarities  in  phonetic  features  during  the  perception  of  native  and  non -native 

consonants.  These  phonetic  feature -based  representations  were  found  within  a network  distributed  over 

bilateral  temporal  and  frontal  motor  regions,  under  both  clear  and  degraded  listening  conditions.  This  suggests 

that  listeners  accessed  these  encoded  phonetic  features  when  categorizing  the  heard  consonants. 

The  perception  of  consonants  with  the  same  place  of  articulation  (e.g.,  bilabial  for  intact  /p/  and  /pʰ/,  uvular 

for  intact  and  noisy  /ʁ/)  elicit ed  neural  patterns  in  bilateral  precentral  and  superior  temporal  regions,  with 

more  focal  activity  in  the  left  hemisphere  and  more  distributed  patterns  in  the  right.  Similarly,  consonants 

sharing  the  same  manner  of  articulation  (e.g.,  plosive  for  intact  /t / and  noisy  /pʰ/,  fricative  for  intact  /ʂ/ and 

intact  /ʁ/)  induced  focal  bilateral  precentral  activity  alongside  more  distributed  bilateral  superior  temporal 

activation.  This  extensive  bilateral  sensorimotor  engagement  likely  reflects  the  flexible  perceptu al 

mechanisms  required  to  decode  these  inherently  motoric  features  (Correia  et  al.,  2015;  Zheng  et  al.,  2025). 

Specifically,  the  perception  of  place  and  manner  of  articulation  may  engage  representations  of  dynamically 

coordinated  gestures  among  multiple  ar ticulators,  such  as  lips,  tongue,  jaw , and  associated  articulatory 

structures  (Perrier,  2006).  The  broader  superior  temporal  clusters  observed  for  manner  of  articulation  may 

reflect  the  extraction  of  additional  temporal  cues,  such  as  the  degree  and  duratio n of  articulatory  closure, 

which  contribute  to  manner  distinctions  (Fuchs  & Birkholz,  2019).  Consistent  with  this  interpretation,  a study 

using  direct  cortical  recordings  in  the  STG  showed  that  auditory  responses  are  more  strongly  organized  by 

manner  than  by  place  of  articulation,  reflecting  sensitivity  to  the  degree  rather  than  the  location  of  articulatory 

constriction  in  the  vocal  tract  (Mesgarani  et  al.,  2014). 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.06.709780 doi: bioRxiv preprint

16 

In  light  of  our  findings  of  bilateral  feature -based  representations,  and  previous  reports  of  hemispheric  and 

regional  differences  in  phonetic  encoding,  we  further  examined  whether  STG  and  pre -CG  encode  place  and 

manner  of  articulation  to  the  same  extent  across  hemispheres.  In  the  left  hemisphere,  both  regions 

contributed  equally,  while  in  the  rig ht  hemisphere,  STG  exhibited  stronger  encoding  than  both  the  right  pre -

CG  and  the  left  STG  (consistent  with  Arsenault  & Buchsbaum,  2015,  but  see  Archila -Meléndez  et  al.,  2018). 

These  findings  not  only  corroborate  the  sensorimotor  nature  of  speech  sounds  (L aurent  et  al.,  2017;  Schomers 

& Pulvermüller,  2016;  Schwartz  et  al.,  2008,  2012),  but  also  suggest  the  functional  role  of  both  bilateral  motor 

and  auditory  systems  in  representing  phonetic  features,  with  a potential  right -hemispheric  advantage.  Such  a

cont ribution  of  the  right  hemisphere  may  support  enhanced  speech  decoding  across  languages  and  perceptual 

conditions,  particularly  in  comparison  to  previous  studies  that  investigated  these  phonetic  features  only  in 

intact  native  speech  (Archila -Meléndez  et  al. , 2018;  Arsenault  & Buchsbaum,  2015;  Correia  et  al.,  2015). 

In  contrast,  perceiving  consonants  sharing  aspiration  or  voicing  features  did  not  engage  bilateral  auditory  and 

motor  regions  as  extensively  as  place  and  manner  of  articulation.  These  features  pr imarily  depend  on  laryngeal 

opening  and  its  temporal  coordination  with  oral  gestures  (Fuchs  & Birkholz,  2019;  Jackson,  2000;  Löfqvist, 

1995).  Listening  to  plosives  with  the  same  aspiration  (e.g.,  intact  or  noisy  aspirated  /pʰ/  and  /tʰ/)  activated  a

cluster  in  the  right  dorsal  precentral  gyrus,  whereas  fricatives  sharing  voicing  (e.g.,  intact  and  noisy  voiced  /ʁ/, 

or  intact  and  noisy  unvoiced  /x/)  were  encoded  focally  in  left  motor  regions  and  bilateral  superior  temporal 

regions.  Unlike  the  analyses  for  plac e and  manner  that  included  all  consonants,  RSA  for  aspiration  were 

restricted  to  plosives  and  RSA  for  voicing  to  fricatives , which  may  account  for  the  more  localized  activation 

and  reduced  statistical  power  observed.  Beyond  these  methodological  considerati ons,  the  right  dorsal 

precentral  cluster  associated  with  aspiration  (MNI  peak  [38,  -19,  56])  aligns  with  prior  evidence  implicating 

this  region  in  fine  laryngeal  motor  control  (MNI  peak  [43,  -18,  38],  Eichert  et  al.,  2020;  [40,  -5,  50],  Liang  et  al., 

2023) , which  is  crucial  for  regulating  voice -onset  time  (VOT).  This  is  consistent  with  the  role  of  VOT  as  a

distinctive  feature  between  aspirated  and  unaspirated  consonants,  with  longer  values  for  the  former,  as  well 

as  with  fMRI  studies  showing  that  this  dorsa l precentral  region  contributes  to  detecting  subtle  VOT  differences 

in  plosives  (Liang  et  al.,  2023).  By  contrast,  voicing  primarily  reflects  the  presence  or  absence  of  vocal  fold 

vibration.  Specifically,  voiced  fricatives  require  precise  laryngeal -oral  co ordination,  with  a partially  closed 

glottis  sustaining  phonation  while  allowing  airflow  for  oral  turbulence  (Fuchs  & Birkholz,  2019).  Perception  of 

this  feature  likely  involves  both  retrieval  of  motor  commands  and  ongoing  auditory  monitoring  of  acoustic 

ou tcomes.  Accordingly,  in  our  study,  voicing  was  encoded  in  a separate,  more  inferior  left  precentral  cluster 

(MNI  peak  [-51,  2,  24]),  lying  relatively  close  to  the  ventral  part  of  the  larynx  motor  area  (MNI  peak  [-58,  -2, 

18],  Eichert  et  al.,  2020;  [-58,  3,  25],  Tamura  et  al.,  2022).  This  region  is  involved  in  the  production  of 

vocalizations  and  voiced  consonants  (Bouchard  et  al.,  2013;  Grabski  et  al.,  2012;  Dichter  et  al.,  2018;  Eichert 

et  al.,  2020;  Toyoda  et  al.,  2014)  as  well  as  in  the  perception  of  voic ing  (Tamura  et  al.,  2022).  Notably,  we  also 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.06.709780 doi: bioRxiv preprint

17 

found  encoding  of  voicing  in  bilateral  superior  temporal  regions,  in  line  with  previous  MVPA  studies  that 

reported  a predominant  involvement  of  auditory  regions  for  this  feature  (Correia  et  al.,  2015). 

Our  findings  point  to  broad  sensorimotor  involvement  in  processing  phonetic  features  during  speech 

perception . However,  the  question  remains  whether  speech  sounds  are  primarily  stored  as  sensory,  motor  or 

integrated  sensorimotor  representations  in  the  brain.  Neuroimaging  and  electrophysiological  evidence  has 

been  put  forward  in  support  of  each  view.  For  instance,  intracranial  recordings  in  the  motor  cortex  revealed 

that  neural  responses  during  speech  perception  reflected  the  acoustic  properties  of  speech  sounds ,

resembling  responses  observed  in  the  auditory  cortex  (Cheung  et  al.,  2016).  This  finding  suggests  that  the 

motor  cortex  may  contribute  to  speech  perception  by  processing  auditory  rather  than  articulatory 

information,  thereby  indicating  predominantly  sen sory -based  representations.  In  contrast,  in  the  study  by 

Archila -Meléndez  and  colleagues  (2018),  fMRI  neural  patterns  in  motor  regions  generalized  across  perceived 

consonants  sharing  the  same  place  of  articulation,  consistent  with  the  retrieval  of  motor -ba sed,  articulatory 

representations.  Evidence  for  the  sensorimotor  account  was  provided  by  Zheng  and  colleagues  (2025)  who 

showed  that  motoric  features  related  to  place  of  articulation  were  encoded  in  the  right  precentral  and  left 

superior  temporal  gyri,  whe reas  manner  of  articulation,  thought  to  be  more  representative  of  high -order 

acoustic  features,  was  encoded  in  left  IFG  and  STG  regions  (see  also  Cheung  et  al.,  2016;  Mesgarani  et  al., 

2014).  In  addition,  lower -level  acoustic  spectrotemporal  features  were  localized  in  the  right  Heschl’s  gyrus. 

Our  RSA  results  appear  in  line  with  this  fram ework  as  both  frontal  motor  and  temporal  auditory  regions 

encoded  articulatory  and  acoustic  dimensions  of  speech  sounds,  namely  place,  manner,  voicing  and 

aspiration,  thus  supporting  sensorimotor  representations  of  speech  sounds  (see  also  Correia  et  al.,  2015). 

The  role  of  the  right  motor  system  in  decoding  perceived  phonetic  features 

Despite  the  frequently  reported  left -lateralized  involvement  of  motor  regions  in  speech  sound  processing 

(e.g.,  Callan  et  al.,  2010;  D’Ausilio  et  al.,  2009,  2012;  Evans  & Davis,  2015;  Möttönen  & Watkins,  2009)  – likely 

reflecting  the  left  hemisphere  focus  in  many  studies  (see  Tseng  et  al.,  2025  for  a review)  – our  findings  point 

to  a substanti al  contribution  of  right -hemisphere  motor  areas.  Specifically,  we  found  somatotopic  mapping  of 

native  articulatory  features  in  the  right  motor  cortex  only.  In  addition,  there  was  no  left -hemispheric 

advantage  in  encoding  phonetic  features,  place  and  manner  of  articulation  in  particular,  when  comparing 

motor  engagement  across  hemispheres.  Consistently,  our  univariate  analyses  highlighted  the  right  precentral 

gyrus  as  a key  region  responding  to  both  correctly  identified  native  and  non -native  consonants  under  intact 

and  noisy  conditions.  These  findings  align  with  previous  neuroimaging  work  showing  either  bilateral  or  right -

dominant  motor  activity  during  speech  perception  and  production  (e.g.,  Behroozmand  et  al.,  2015;  Cogan  et 

al.,  2014;  Dole  et  al.,  2022;  Prei sig  et  al.,  2022;  Sheng  et  al.,  2019;  see  Skipper  et  al.,  2017  and  Tseng  et  al., 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.06.709780 doi: bioRxiv preprint

18 

2025  for  reviews).  Right  motor  contribution  has  notably  been  reported  under  increased  perceptual  demands ,

such  as  accelerated  speech  rate  or  noise -masked  speech  (Hincapié -Casa s et  al.,  2021;  Nuttall  et  al.,  2018). 

FMRI  studies  using  MVPA  have  also  highlighted  a predominant  role  of  the  right  motor  cortex  in  decoding 

native  articulatory  features,  particularly  those  specifying  place  of  articulation  (Archila -Meléndez  et  al.,  2018; 

Correia  et  al.,  2015;  Zheng  et  al.,  2025).  From  a theoretical  standpoint,  the  DIVA  model  of  speech  acquisition 

and  production  (Tourville  & Guenther,  2011)  posits  a right -lateralized  feedback  control  map  in  the  premotor 

cortex,  that  transform s sensory  error  signals  computed  in  bilateral  auditory  and  somatosensory  regions  into 

corrective  motor  commands.  These  feedback -based  corrections  can  be  integrated  into  feedforward  motor 

programs,  supporting  stable  sensorimotor  representations  of  speech  sounds.  Such  representations  may  be 

engaged  in  the  decoding  of  articulatory  features  during  speech  perception  in  both  hemispheres,  particularly 

under  challenging  listening  conditions. 

CONCLUSION 

The  present  study  provides  novel  neuroimaging  evidence  that  advances  on going  discussions  on  the  role  of  the 

motor  system  in  speech  perception  and  addresses  a critical  gap  in  the  literature  on  non -native  speech 

perception.  By  combining  a multivariate  fMRI  approach  with  different  language  and  perceptual  conditions,  we 

show  that  the  motor  system,  alongside  the  auditory  system,  codes  for  phonetic  features.  Crucially,  we 

demonstrate  somatotopic  organization  of  articulatory  features  within  the  motor  cortex  during  native 

consonant  categorization  in  noise,  and  show  that  distributed  se nsorimotor  networks  encode  phonetic 

distinctions  both  within  and  across  native  and  non -native  phonological  inventories,  and  under  both  clear  and 

noisy  listening  situations.  These  findings  reinforce  the  view  that  speech  perception  is  inherently  embodied, 

wi th  motor  regions  contributing  to  the  decoding  and  representation  of  phonetic  features  across  languages 

and  perceptual  environments. 

METHODS 

Participants 

A total  of  42  healthy  adult  participants  were  recruited  for  the  study,  which  consisted  of  a behavior al  inclusion 

session  and  a fMRI  session.  Thirty -two  participants  passed  the  inclusion  pre -test  (see  Behavioral  task  screening 

and  familiarization  in  SuppIementary  Information)  and  participated  in  the  fMRI  acquisition.  Out  of  this  sample, 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.06.709780 doi: bioRxiv preprint

19 

eight  participants  were  excluded  due  to  a withdrawal  (n  = 1),  massive  head  motions  (n  = 1),  and  low  behavioral 

performance  (n  = 6)  during  scanning,  resulting  in  24  analyzed  participants  (17  females,  age  range  20  to  31 

years  old,  age  mean  = 24.45  ± 3.12).  All  participants  we re  right -handed  (Edinburgh  handedness  inventory, 

Oldfield,  1971:  0.9  ± 0.12),  French  native  monolingual  speakers  with  normal  pure -tone  thresholds  in  both  ears 

(-10  to  25  dB  HL  for  250  to  4,000  Hz,  tested  with  the  audiometer  600  M,  Electronica  Technologies) . No  known 

motor,  linguistic,  or  neurological  disorders  were  reported.  All  procedures  were  approved  by  an  ethical 

committee  (Comité  de  Protection  des  Personnes  OUEST  IV,  69HCL17_0359  NCT03223090).  All  participants 

signed  a consent  form  before  the  experimen t and  were  paid  for  their  participation. 

Stimuli 

Eight  consonant -vowel  (CV)  syllables  including  four  French  tokens  (/pa/,  /ta/,  /ʃa/  or  /ʁa/)  and  their  four 

Mandarin  “counterparts”  (/pʰa/,  /tʰa/,  /ʂa/  or  /xa/)  were  recorded  (16 -bit  quantization;  44.1  kHz  sampling 

rate)  in  a sound -isolated  booth  by  a female  native  bilingual  French -Mandarin  speaker.  Mandarin  and  French, 

belonging  to  different  language  families,  display  both  shared  consonants  and  consonants  that  are  language -

specific.  More  specifically,  thes e two  languages  allow  to  examine  behavioral  and  cortical  responses  to 

consonants  featuring  either  the  same  phonetic  feature  (e.g.  for  place  of  articulation:  lips  for  the  bilabials  /p/ 

and  /pʰ/,  and  tongue  for  the  dentals  /t/  and  /tʰ/)  or  that  differ  on  one  or  more  features.  Here,  only  a single 

phonetic  feature  differentiates  the  French  and  Mandarin  consonants  in  three  of  the  pairs  (i.e.  aspiration  for 

the  bi labial  /p/ -/pʰ/  and  dental  plosives  /t/ -/tʰ/,  and  tongue  retroflection  for  the  coronal  fricatives  /ʃ/-/ʂ/).  By 

contrast,  the  dorsal  fricatives  (voiced  uvular  /ʁ/ and  voiceless  velar  /x/)  differ  by  two  phonetic  features,  namely 

voicing  and  place  of  articulation  (Figure  6,  see  measured  acoustic  properties  in  Table  S3).  To  avoid  potential 

confounds  from  vowe l-related  prosody  or  tone,  we  replaced  the  vowel  /a/  from  the  originally -produced 

Mandarin  tokens  by  the  corresponding  French  /a/  in  each  consonant  pair  (/p/ -/pʰ/,  /t/ -/tʰ/,  /ʃ/-/ʂ/ and  /ʁ/-

/x/)  using  Praat  (Boersma  & Weenink,  2022).  Each  syllable  lasted  approximately  500  ms  and  was  fixed  at  80 

dB  in  terms  of  average  root  mean  square  sound  pressure  level  (SPL).  To  create  the  noisy  versions  of  the  stimuli, 

each  of  the  eight  syllables  was  masked  by  a 500  ms  pink  noise  segment  at  72  dB  SPL  (i.e.  SNR  = 8,  see  Du et 

al.,  2014)  using  a Praat  script  (Petersen,  2004).  We  then  generated  triplets  of  syllables  as  stimuli  of  interest: 

each  of  the  intact  (non -noisy)  and  noisy  syllables  were  reduplicated  three  times  and  concatenated  every  500 

ms  as  a triplet.  The  short  in terstimulus  interval  (ISI;  time  interval  between  the  offset  of  a syllable  and  the  onset 

of  the  next  one)  in  the  triplet  was  filled  either  with  silence  or  pink  noise  (for  the  noisy  version).  In  total,  the 

experiment  included  16  different  stimuli  (8  syllable  triplets  × 2 noise  conditions,  intact  and  noisy  respectively) 

that  were  presented  at  80  dB  SPL. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.06.709780 doi: bioRxiv preprint

20 

Figure  6. Syllable  stimuli  and  phonetic  features  of  the  consonants.  The  native  tokens  (/pa/,  /ta/,  /ʃa/  and  /ʁa/) 

are  in  blue,  while  the  non -native  Mandari n tokens  (/pʰa/,  /tʰa/,  /ʂa/  and  /xa/)  are  in  orange.  For  each  language, 

rectangles  with  green  solid  lines  indicate  the  place  of  articulation  of  the  consonants,  those  with  green  dashed 

lines  indicate  their  manner  of  articulation.  The  phonetic  differences  between  the  native  and  non -native 

consonants  in  each  pair  are  summarized  in  the  middle. 

Task  and  experimental  procedure 

Participants  who  passed  the  behavioral  inclusion  test  (see  Behavioral  task  screening  and  familiarization  in  SI )

underwent  the  fMRI  sess ion  on  a different  day.  The  task  in  the  scanner  was  a two -alternative  forced  choice 

(2AFC)  task  in  which  participants  were  required  to  listen  to  triplets  of  CV  syllables  (e.g.,  /pa  pa  pa/)  in  the  two 

languages  and  categorize  the  heard  consonant  as  native  or non -native.  It  consisted  of  6 experimental  blocks, 

each  including  48  trials  (8  triplets  of  syllables  × 2 noise  conditions  × 3 repetitions),  resulting  in  a total  of  288 

trials  for  a duration  of  one  hour  (Figure  7).  Each  block  began  with  a 48 -s period  with  a grey  fixation  point 

displayed  at  the  center  of  the  screen,  used  as  a baseline.  This  long  baseline  duration  is  related  to  the  sparse 

sampling  fMRI  design  (see  MRI  Acquisition ).  Each  trial  then  started  with  a white  fixation  point  at  the  same 

location,  sho wn  for  a duration  jittered  between  500  and  750  ms,  which  was  followed  by  the  auditory  stimulus 

(i.e.  a 1500  ms  triplet  of  CV  syllables)  and  a 1500  ms  window  for  response.  Participants  responded  by  pressing 

one  of  two  buttons  using  their  left  index  or  middl e finger,  corresponding  to  icons  on  the  screen:  a French  flag 

for  native  consonants  and  an  earth  icon  for  non -native  consonants.  The  association  between  the  button  press 

(finger  used)  and  the  icons  on  the  screen  was  counterbalanced  across  participants.  The se  icons  stayed  on  the 

screen  until  the  participants’  response  or  for  a maximum  of  1500  ms  in  case  of  no  response,  and  they  were 

replaced  by  a grey  fixation  point  (4500  ms)  before  the  next  trial. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.06.709780 doi: bioRxiv preprint

21 

Given  the  use  of  a sparse  sequence  for  MRI  (see  MRI  Acquisition ),  the  inter -trial  interval  (ITI)  varied  between 

8000  and  8250  ms  (fixation  point  500  ms  or  750  ms  + stimulus  1500  ms  + response  window  1500ms  +

acquisition  TR  (repetition  time)  4500  ms).  Auditory  stimuli  were  presented  through  insert  earphones 

(Sensimetrics  Model  S14  with  standard  Comply  Foam  Canal  Tips)  to  reduce  the  impact  of  the  scanner  noise 

on  the  perceptual  categorization  task. 

The  consonant  categorization  task  (2AFC)  was  followed  by  a motor  localizer  task,  in  which  the  participants 

were  required  to  perform  small  movements  of  the  lips  (silently  articulating  “ma”),  tongue  (silently  articulating 

“la”),  as  well  as  left  and  right  index  fingers  (tapping  movements)  using  continuous  MRI  sampling.  There  was 

one  block,  which  included  6 motor  trials  for  each  body  part,  resulting  in  a total  of  24  trials  randomized  across 

participants.  Each  trial  began  with  a 15000  ms  baseline  recording  (with  a grey  fixation  point  displayed  on  the 

screen),  followed  by  2000  ms  of  written  instructions,  10000  ms  of  moveme nts  with  a white  fixation  point,  and 

6000  ms  of  rest  with  an  orange  fixation  point  to  let  the  BOLD  signal  come  back  to  baseline  levels.  The  fMRI 

session  ended  with  a 5-minutes  T1 -weighted  anatomical  acquisition,  for  a total  duration  of  1 hour  and  30 

minute s for  each  participant. 

Figure  7. Experimental  procedure  for  the  2AFC  categorization  task  on  native  and  non -native  consonants  and 

corresponding  fMRI  acquisition  sequence.  The  experimental  session  included  six  blocks,  corresponding  to  six 

functional  run s,  during  which  stimuli  (triplets  of  CV  syllables)  were  auditorily  presented  during  a silent  TR 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.06.709780 doi: bioRxiv preprint

22 

(repetition  time)  using  a sparse  imaging  sequence.  Participants  were  instructed  to  categorize  the  heard 

consonants  either  as  native  (French  flag)  or  foreign  (ea rth  icon)  speech  sounds  by  pressing  one  of  two  buttons. 

The  acquisition  ended  with  one  block  of  motor  localizer  task,  corresponding  to  one  functional  run  using  classic 

continuous  acquisition  sequence,  and  an  anatomical  run. 

Behavioral  Data  Acquisition  & Analysis 

The  behavioral  task  was  programmed  and  participants’  responses  were  recorded  with  OpenSesame  3.3.11 

(Mathôt  et  al.,  2012;  Mathôt  & March,  2022).  Behavioral  accuracy  (%  of  correct  consonant  categorization)  in 

the  2AFC  task  was  assessed  using  a repe ated  measures  ANOVA  including  language  (native  vs.  non -native), 

noise  (intact  vs.  noisy)  and  consonant  (bi labials  /p -pʰ/,  dentals  /t -tʰ/,  coronal  fricatives  /ʃ-ʂ/ vs.  dorsal  fricatives 

/ʁ-x/)  as  within -subject  factors,  and  subjects  as  a random  factor.  Post -hoc  tests  (Tukey's  HSD)  were  conducted 

to  assess  significant  interactions  between  the  factors.  Statistical  analyses  were  run  in  Python  3.11.5. 

MRI  Acquisition 

Participants’  brain  activity  was  recorded  with  a Siemens  Prisma  3T  scanner  (Siemens  Medical  Systems, 

Erlangen,  Germany)  with  a 64 -channel  head/neck  receive -array  coil,  using  a multiband  gradient  echo  planar 

imaging  (EPI)  sequence.  Functional  T2* -weighted  images  were  acquired  applying  a sparse  imaging  sequence 

(Hall  et  al.,  1999;  Peelle  et  al.,  201 0),  where  speech  stimuli  are  presented  during  silent  TRs  where  no  functional 

images  are  acquired  so  as  to  reduce  scanner  noise  (Pulvermüller  et  al.,  2006;  Schomers  & Pulvermüller,  2016). 

Brain  activity  to  these  stimuli  is  then  captured  with  subsequent  acqu isition  TRs  following  the  timing  of  the 

hemodynamic  response.  Here,  each  sequence  included  three  silent  TRs,  interspersed  with  three  acquisition 

TRs  (TR  = 1500  ms).  Six  runs  of  sparse  sampling  were  used  for  the  consonant  categorization  task  (2AFC).  One 

run  of  continuous  sampling,  consisting  exclusively  of  acquisition  TRs,  was  applied  for  the  motor  localizer  task. 

The  same  parameters  were  set  for  both  sparse  and  continuous  functional  acquisition  runs  (echo  time  (TE)  =

30  ms;  TR  = 1500  ms;  flip  angle  = 75°;  slice  thickness  = 2.7  mm;  voxel  size  = 2.69  × 2.69  × 2.7  mm).  Anatomical 

T1 -weighted  images  were  acquired  with  a 1-mm  isotropic  voxel  and  a generalized  auto -calibrating  partially 

parallel  acquisition  (GRAPPA)  (TE  = 2.8  ms,  TR  = 2400  ms).  Overall,  158  volume s were  acquired  per  run  in  the 

consonant  categorization  task  (for  a total  of  948  volumes  over  the  six  runs)  and  300  volumes  were  acquired  in 

the  motor  localizer  task. 

fMRI  Preprocessing 

Preprocessing  of  the  fMRI  data  was  performed  using  the  fMRIPrep  pipeli ne  version  23.0.1  (RRID:SCR_016216; 

Esteban  et  al.,  2019).  Functional  data  were  motion  corrected  by  volume -realignment  using  MCFLIRT  (FSL 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.06.709780 doi: bioRxiv preprint

23 

6.0.5.1:57b01774;  Jenkinson  et  al.,  2002)  and  registered  to  the  MNI152NLin2009cAsym  standard  space 

template.  BOLD  runs  were  slice -time  corrected  to  0.699  s (the  actual  slice  acquisition  ranging  from  0 to  1.4  s) 

using  3dTshift  from  AFNI  (RRID:SCR_005927;  Cox  & Hyde,  1997).  Preprocessing  reports  for  all  participants  are 

available  at  the  Open  Science  Framework  (https://osf.i o/f84qr ).

Univariate  Analyses 

The  univariate  analyses  were  conducted  using  the  Nilearn  0.10.2  library  (Abraham  et  al.,  2014)  in  Python.  Six 

head  motion  parameters  (3  translation  and  3 rotation  parameters)  and  a nuisance  denoising  regressor 

(Caballero -Gaud es  & Reynolds,  2017)  were  included  in  a general  linear  model  (GLM)  as  regressors  of  no 

interest.  This  regressor  included  the  additional  3 temporal  derivatives  of  each  head  motion  parameter,  5 white 

matter  principal  components  (PCs),  and  5 cerebrospinal  flu id  PCs,  which  were  available  for  all  participants 

across  runs.  The  hemodynamic  response  function  (HRF)  was  modeled  using  the  canonical  Statistical 

Parametric  Mapping  (SPM)  HRF  (a  double -gamma  function,  Friston  et  al.,  1998).  A high -pass  filter  of  128  s

all owed  to  remove  low -frequency  signal  drifts  and  the  time  of  the  reference  slice  was  adjusted  based  on  the 

parameter  used  in  the  slice  timing  preprocessing.  The  imaging  data  were  smoothed  with  a 6-mm  full  width  at 

half  maximum  (FWHM)  kernel.  For  the  consonan t categorization  data,  a modulation  regressor  for  behavioral 

accuracy  was  applied  to  include  only  trials  with  correct  responses,  excluding  those  with  incorrect  responses 

(see  Figure  S4  for  Brain  activations  computed  without  applying  the  modulation  regresso r).  Considering  the  ~4 

to  6 s delay  of  the  BOLD  signal  from  stimulus  onset  (Perrachione  & Ghosh,  2013),  only  the  functional  data  from 

the  last  two  acquisition  TRs  after  stimulus  presentation  (i.e.  data  included  from  6 s after  the  fixation  onset, 

with  fixat ion  jittered  between  0.5  to  0.75  s)  were  included  for  further  analyses.  The  data  were  then  fitted  into 

the  first -level  GLM  to  compute  the  contrasts  of  the  8 consonants  (4  tokens  by  language)  and  2 noise 

conditions. 

To  assess  the  overall  activation  for  pro cessing  consonants  in  each  language  and  each  noise  condition,  contrasts 

against  the  baseline  were  calculated  (Language  and  Noise  Contrasts)  as  follows: 

All  Intact  Native  = [(intact  /p/  + intact  /t/  + intact  /ʃ/ + intact  /ʁ/)  – Baseline], 

All  Noisy  Native  = [(noisy  /p/  + noisy  /t/  + noisy  /ʃ/ + noisy  /ʁ/)  – Baseline], 

All  Intact  Non -native  = [(intact  /pʰ/  + intact  /tʰ/  + intact  /ʂ/ + intact  /x/)  – Baseline], 

All  Noisy  Non -native  = [(noisy  /pʰ/  + noisy  /tʰ/  + noisy  /ʂ/ + noisy  /x/)  – Baseline] 

We  also  evaluat ed  the  main  effects  of  language  and  noise  independently  with  the  following  contrasts  (Main 

Effect  Contrasts): 

All  Native  = [(intact  /p/  + intact  /t/  + intact  /ʃ/ + intact  /ʁ/ + noisy  /p/  + noisy  /t/  + noisy  /ʃ/ + noisy  /ʁ/)  – Baseline], 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.06.709780 doi: bioRxiv preprint

24 

All  Non -native  = [(intact  /pʰ/  + intact  /tʰ/  + intact  /ʂ/ + intact  /x/  + noisy  /pʰ/  + noisy  /tʰ/  + noisy  /ʂ/ + noisy  /x/)  – Baseline], 

All  Intact  = [(intact  /p/  + intact  /t/  + intact  /ʃ/ + intact  /ʁ/ + intact  /pʰ/  + intact  /tʰ/  + intact  /ʂ/ + intact  /x/)  – Baseline], 

All  Noisy  = [(noisy  /p/  + noisy  /t/  + noisy  /ʃ/ + noisy  /ʁ/ + noisy  /pʰ/  + noisy  /tʰ/  + noisy  /ʂ/ + noisy  /x/)  – Baseline], 

Native  vs.  Non -native  = [All  Native  – All  Non -native], 

Non -native  vs.  Native  = [All  Non -native  – All  Native], 

Intact  vs.  Noisy  = [All  In tact  – All  Noisy], 

Noisy  vs.  Intact  = [All  Noisy  – All  Intact] 

For  the  group -level  analysis,  we  conducted  a within -subject  paired  two -sample  t-test  for  each  of  the  contrasts 

computed  at  the  first  level  (see  Language  and  Noise  Contrasts  and  Main  Effect  Con trasts  above).  To  further 

explore  the  relationship  between  brain  activation  and  behavioral  performance,  we  additionally  applied 

individual  mean  accuracy  for  consonant  categorization  (across  trials)  as  a regressor  of  interest  for  the  Main 

Effect  Contrasts  (All  Native,  All  Non -native,  All  Intact  and  All  Noisy)  in  the  paired  two -sample  t-test.  Statistical 

inferences  for  the  group -averaged  activation  were  performed  using  a map -wise  p-value  threshold  corrected 

for  multiple  comparisons  with  the  False  Discovery  Ra te  (FDR,  see  Table  S1,  Figure  S1,  S3  and  S4  for  the 

univariate  results). 

Multivariate  Pattern  Analysis 

Cross -Modal  Classification.  To  examine  the  motor  somatotopy  of  consonant  perception,  we  performed  a

cross -modal  classification  analysis  to  test  for  shar ed  neural  patterns  in  the  motor  cortex  between  articulatory 

lip  and  tongue  movements  and  perception  of  bi labial  and  dental  consonants.  More  specifically,  we  assessed 

whether  a classifier  trained  on  the  motor  neural  patterns  could  predict  the  speech  percept ion  patterns. 

The  analysis  used  t-maps  derived  from  motor  localizer  trials  (lip  and  tongue  movements)  and  consonant 

perception  blocks  (bi labial  and  dental  consonants).  The  preprocessing  steps  for  the  cross -modal  decoding  for 

each  participant  were  similar  to  the  univariate  first -level  analysis  but  without  applying  any  smoothing  nor  the 

behavioral  modulation  regressor.  For  the  motor  localizer  data,  all  six  trials  of  the  two  body  part  movements 

were  fitted  into  the  first -level  GLM  to  compute  the  contrast  acti vations  of  each  articulator  of  interest  (lips  or 

tongue)  against  the  baseline  to  localize  the  corresponding  articulatory  regions,  yielding  6 t-maps  for  each 

contrast  per  participant: 

Lip  Motor  Localizer  = [Lips  – Baseline] 

Tongue  Motor  Localizer  = [Tongue  – Baseline] 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.06.709780 doi: bioRxiv preprint

25 

Similarly,  for  the  speech  perception  data,  contrasts  of  activation  for  consonant  perception  against  the  baseline 

(2  noise  x 2 languages  x 4 consonant  conditions)  were  computed  from  each  block  (n  = 6),  yielding  6 t-maps  for 

each  contrast  per  par ticipant  (Consonant  Perception  Contrasts):                               

> Intact Native Bil abials =[intact /p/ –Baseline],
> Intact Native Dentals =[intact /t/ –Baseline],
> Intact Native Coronal Fricatives =[intact /ʃ/–Baseline],
> Intact Native Dorsal Fricatives =[intact /ʁ/–Base line]

The  same  rationale  was  applied  to  compute  contrasts  for  the  Noisy  Native,  Intact  Non -native  and  Noisy  Non -

native  conditions  (Table  S4).  Each  of  these  consonant  perception  t-maps  contained  the  averaged  activations 

from  the  3 repeated  trials  for  each  condition.  Only  bi labial  and  dental  consonant  perception  data  were  used 

for  classification.  This  led  to  12  t-maps  (6  runs  x 2 consonants)  for  each  language  and  perceptual  condition 

(intact  or  noisy;  e.g.,  6 intact  native  bi labial  perception  t-maps,  6 noisy  non -native  dental  perception  t-maps, 

etc.). 

The  classification  was  conducted  within  individual  spherical  regions  of  interest  (ROIs),  using  a linear  support 

vector  machine  (SVM)  classifier  implemented  in  Nilearn.  Each  individual  spherical  ROI  in  each  hemisp here  was 

defined  as  a 10  mm  sphere  (mean  voxel  numbers  = 190)  around  the  peak  coordinate  (Table  S5  and  Figure  S7) 

of  the  Mouth  Motor  Localizer  contrast.  This  contrast  was  computed  to  isolate  motor  regions  recruited  for 

movements  of  both  articulators  of  int erest  (lips  and  tongue),  distinct  from  regions  associated  with  finger 

movements,  so  to  specifically  identify  articulatory  representations  in  the  motor  cortex:             

> Mouth Motor Localizer =[(Lips +Tongue) –(Left Finger +Right Finger)]

Before  decoding,  to  mini mize  the  univariate  differences  between  the  two  modalities  (articulatory  movements 

and  speech  perception)  and  the  two  scan  sequences  (continuous  and  sparse  sampling),  we  normalized  the 

data  (demeaning  and  z-scored  standardization)  of  each  t-map  in  each  mod ality  for  each  participant  (Rezk  et 

al.,  2020).  A within -modal  classifier  was  first  trained  and  tested  on  the  motor  data  to  discriminate  the  neural 

patterns  of  lip  and  tongue  articulatory  movements.  A leave -one -trial -out  cross -validation  scheme  was 

impleme nted,  which  led  to  6 folds  of  cross -validation.  In  each  fold,  we  trained  the  classifier  on  N-1 trials  (10  t-

maps  for  both  classes,  lips  and  tongue,  5 trials  for  each  class)  and  tested  it  on  the  two  t-maps  from  the  two 

left -out  trials  (one  for  each  class).  The  classifiers  with  above -chance  within -modal  decoding  (chance  level  =

0.5)  were  used  for  cross -modal  decoding,  namely  we  additionally  tested  them  on  the  activations  elicited  by 

the  perception  of  bi labial  and  dental  consonants  in  the  2AFC  task  (6  runs).  The  perception  data  for  each 

language  and  noise  condition  were  tested  by  the  same  classifier  separately,  i.e.  each  cross -modal  decoding 

analysis  was  implemented  on  one  of  the  four  speech  conditions  (intact  native,  noisy  native,  intact  non -native 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.06.709780 doi: bioRxiv preprint

26 

and  noisy  non -native)  with  12  t-maps  (6  t-maps  x 2 classes:  bi labials  vs.  dentals).  An  additional  cross -modal 

decoding  was  similarly  conducted,  as  a control,  using  the  same  classifier  to  test  on  the  activations  elicited  by 

the  perceived  fricatives  (12  t-maps:  6 t-map s x 2 classes:  coronal  vs.  dorsal  fricatives;  see  Figure  S5).  We 

obtained  a classification  accuracy  score  for  each  participant  by  averaging  the  classification  accuracies  of  all 

cross -validation  folds  for  each  condition  of  each  modality  (i.e.  movement  and  perception)  and  hemisphere. 

We  then  calculated  group  mean  accuracy  for  each  condition  in  each  modality  and  hemisphere.  Outliers  (±3

SD  from  the  mean,  n = 4)  were  identified  based  on  z-scores  across  participants  and  excluded  prior  to  statistical 

analyses.  St atistical  significance  was  assessed  by  one -sample  t-tests  against  chance  level  with  FDR  correction 

and  multiple  testing  correction  for  the  four  speech  conditions  in  the  two  hemispheres. 

Representational  Similarity  Analysis.  Through  RSA  (Kriegeskorte  et  al . 2008),  we  tested  the  similarity  between 

the  neural  patterns  induced  by  the  different  conditions,  on  the  basis  of  a priori  theoretical  models.  We 

performed  a searchlight  RSA  to  assess  whether  the  examined  phonetic  features  were  encoded  in  predefined 

ROIs  during  consonant  perception.  The  theoretical  models  were  conceptualized  by  modeling  the  similarity 

between  the  phonetic  features  of  the  heard  consonants  across  languages  and  perceptual  conditions.  The 

theoretical  representational  dissimilarity  matrices  (RD Ms;  Figure  3)  were  expressed  as  a set  of  16  x 16  matrices 

corresponding  to  the  16  experimental  conditions  (8  consonants  x 2 noise  conditions).  Each  cell  in  the  matrix 

represents  the  predicted  similarity  (converted  as  dissimilarity  for  computations)  between  the  activity  patterns 

of  two  conditions.  A value  of  +1  (blue  tiles)  indicates  increased  dissimilarity  (i.e.  decreased  similarity)  between 

conditions,  while  -1 values  (red  tiles)  indicate  decreased  dissimilarity  (i.e.  increased  similarity).  Elements  of 

the  matrices  that  were  irrelevant  to  the  tested  hypotheses  were  excluded  (N/A  values,  green  tiles).  For 

example,  diagonal  values  were  excluded  to  avoid  high  correlation  between  the  exact  same  conditions  (Evans 

& Davis,  2015;  Ritchie  et  al.,  2017).  We  designed  four  theoretical  RDMs  to  assess  the  neural  representation  of 

four  phonetic  features:  place  of  articulation  (Figure  3A),  manner  of  articulation  (Figure  3B),  aspiration  (Figure 

3C)  and  voicing  (Figure  3D).  Consonants  with  different  phonetic  features  in  each  model  were  considered  to  be 

represented  by  dissimilar  neural  patterns  (+1  in  the  model),  irrespective  of  language  and  noise  (e.g.,  native 

bi labial  /p/  and  non -native  dental  /t h/ for  place;  native  plosive  /p/  and  native  fricative  /ʁ/ for  manner;  native 

una spirated  /p/  and  non -native  aspirated  /t h/ for  aspiration;  native  voiceless  /ʃ/ and  native  voiced  /ʁ/ for 

voicing).  On  the  contrary,  consonants  with  the  same  phonetic  features  of  interest  were  given  -1 value  for 

similarity  of  their  neural  patterns  (e.g.,  native  bi labial  /p/  and  non -native  bi labial  /p h/ for  place;  native  fricative 

/ʃ/ and  non -native  fricative  /x/  for  manner;  native  unaspirated  /p/  and  native  unaspirated  /t/  for  aspiration; 

native  voiceless  /ʃ/ and  non -native  voiceless  /x/  for  voicing).  For  place  and  manner  of  articulation,  we  took  all 

the  consonants  (8  consonants  x 2 noise  conditions)  into  account.  For  aspiration,  we  modelled  only  the  four 

plosives  (/p/,  /p h/,  /t/  and  /t h/),  while  for  voicing,  we  modelled  only  the  four  fricatives  (/ ʃ/,  /ʂ/,  /ʁ/ and  /x/)  to 

reduce  comparisons  across  unbalanced  conditions. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.06.709780 doi: bioRxiv preprint

27 

For  the  speech  perception  data  used  in  RSA,  the  preprocessing  steps  were  similar  to  those  in  the  cross -modal 

decoding  analysis  but  included  all  consonants.  A single  t-map  for  each  of  the  Cons onant  Perception  Contrasts 

(see  Cross -modal  Classification ) was  computed  across  the  6 runs.  We  defined  seven  bilateral  ROIs  based  on 

previous  neuroimaging  findings  on  speech  processing  (Archila -Meléndez  et  al.,  2018;  Arsenault  & Buchsbaum, 

2015;  Correia  et  al.,  2015;  Du  et  al.,  2014;  Evans  & Davis,  2015)  using  the  AAL  atlas  (Tzourio -Mazoyer  et  al., 

2002).  These  ROIs  included  the  bilateral  precentral  and  postcentral  gyri  (pre -CG  and  post -CG),  inferior  frontal 

gyrus  (IFG),  insula,  supramarginal  gyrus  (SMG),  and  superior  and  middle  temporal  gyri  (STG  and  MTG).  The  7

ROIs  were  combined  into  a single  ROI  for  the  searchlight  approach  (see  Correia  et  al.,  2015).  A 10  mm  spherical 

radius  moved  across  each  voxel  in  the  combined  ROI,  with  the  voxel  serving  as  the  cent er  of  the  searchlight 

sphere  (n  = 14,199  voxels).  At  each  searchlight  center,  a neural  RDM  was  generated  and  correlated  to  a

theoretical  RDM  using  an  open -source  Python  toolbox  (rsatoolbox.readthedocs.io,  Nili  et  al.,  2014). 

Specifically,  each  neural  RDM  was  calculated  from  the  pairwise  correlation  between  neural  patterns  of  each 

condition  (n  = 16)  using  cosine  distance,  resulting  in  a 16  x 16  pairwise  matrix.  We  then  calculated  the 

correlation  between  each  of  the  theoretical  RDMs  (predicted  similarity)  and  the  neural  RDMs  (observed 

similarity)  using  Spearman 's rho  (ρ).  The  better  the  theoretical  models  fit  the  empirical  data  (higher  rho 

values),  the  stronger  the  evidence  that  the  modeled  phonetic  features  are  encoded  in  the  observed  neural 

activity.  We  cons tructed  an  individual  brain  map  by  projecting  the  Spearman’s  rho  values  of  each  voxel  back 

onto  each  subject 's anatomical  space.  To  perform  a group  analysis,  we  then  entered  these  individual  brain 

maps  into  a second -level  model.  The  voxel -level  significanc e was  computed  with  a non -parametric 

permutation  test  (n  = 10,000)  and  corrected  for  p-value  with  an  FDR  threshold  at  0.05.  We  further  conducted 

a repeated -measures  ANOVA  to  investigate  the  specificity  of  phonetic  feature  encoding  across  STG  and  pre -

CG  (Ev ans  & Davis,  2015)  and  hemispheres.  Spearman’s  rho  values  extracted  from  these  two  regions  were 

included  in  the  model,  with  ROI  (STG  vs.  pre -CG),  Hemisphere  (left  vs.  right)  and  Phonetic  feature  (place  of 

articulation,  manner  of  articulation,  aspiration  vs . voicing)  as  fixed  factors,  and  subjects  as  a random  factor. 

This  analysis  was  conducted  for  phonetic  features  meeting  a predefined  criterion  from  the  preceding  RSA  (i.e. 

features  represented  in  both  hemispheres  and  across  both  ROIs).  Post -hoc  paired  t-te sts  were  conducted  to 

assess  significant  interactions. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.06.709780 doi: bioRxiv preprint

28 

REFERENCES 

Abraham,  A.,  Pedregosa,  F.,  Eickenberg,  M.,  Gervais,  P.,  Mueller,  A.,  Kossaifi,  J.,  ...  & Varoquaux,  G.  (2014). 

Machine  learning  for  neuroimaging  with  scikit -learn.  Frontiers  in  neuroinformatics , 8, 14. 

Adank,  P.,  Nuttall,  H.  E.,  Banks,  B.,  & Kennedy -Higgins,  D.  (2015).  Neural  bases  of  accented  speech  perception. 

Frontiers  in  Human  Neuroscience , 9. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2015.00558 

Alho,  J.,  Lin,  F.  H.,  Sato,  M.,  Tiitinen,  H.,  Sams,  M.,  & Jääskeläinen,  I.  P.  (2014).  Enhanced  neural  synchrony 

between  left  auditory  and  premotor  cortex  is  associated  with  successful  phonetic  categorization.  Frontiers  in 

Psychology , 5, 394. 

Alwan,  A.,  Jiang,  J.,  & Chen,  W.  (2011).  Perception  of  place  of  articulation  for  plosives  and  fricatives  in 

noise.  Speech  communication , 53 (2),  195 -209. 

Archila -Meléndez,  M.  E.,  Valente,  G.,  Correia,  J.  M.,  Rouhl,  R.  P.  W.,  Kranen -Mastenbroek,  V.  H.  van,  & Jansma, 

B.  M.  (2018).  Sensorimotor  Representation  of  Sp eech  Perception.  Cross -Decoding  of  Place  of  Articulation 

Features  during  Selective  Attention  to  Syllables  in  7T  fMRI.  ENeuro , 5(2). 

https://doi.org/10.1523/ENEURO.0252 -17.2018 

Arsenault,  J.  S.,  & Buchsbaum,  B.  R.  (2015).  Distributed  Neural  Representations  of  Phonological  Features 

during  Speech  Perception.  Journal  of  Neuroscience , 35 (2),  634 –642. 

https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2454 -14.2015 

Arsenault,  J.  S.,  & Buchsbaum,  B.  R.  (2016).  No  evidence  of  somatotopic  place  of  articulation  feature  mapping 

in  moto r cortex  during  passive  speech  perception.  Psychonomic  Bulletin  & Review , 23 (4),  1231 –1240. 

https://doi.org/10.3758/s13423 -015 -0988 -z

Barsalou,  L.  W.  (2008).  Grounded  Cognition.  Annual  Review  of  Psychology , 59 (Volume  59,  2008),  617 –645. 

https://doi.org/10. 1146/annurev.psych.59.103006.093639 

Behroozmand,  R.,  Shebek,  R.,  Hansen,  D.  R.,  Oya,  H.,  Robin,  D.  A.,  Howard  III,  M.  A.,  & Greenlee,  J.  D.  (2015). 

Sensory –motor  networks  involved  in  speech  production  and  motor  control:  An  fMRI  study.  Neuroimage , 109 ,

418 -428. 

Best,  C.  T.  (1994).  The  emergence  of  native -language  phonological  influences  in  infants:  A perceptual 

assimilation  model.  The  development  of  speech  perception:  The  transition  from  speech  sounds  to  spoken 

words , 167 (224),  233 -277. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.06.709780 doi: bioRxiv preprint

29 

Best,  C.  T.,  McRoberts,  G.  W.,  & Goodell,  E.  (2001).  Discrimination  of  non -native  consonant  contrasts  varying 

in  perceptual  assimilation  to  the  listener’s  native  phonological  system.  The  Journal  of  the  Acoustical  Society  of 

America , 109 (2),  775 -794. 

Boersma,  P.,  & Ween ik,  D.  (2022).  Praat:  doing  phonetics  by  computer  [computer  software],  Version  6.2.  14. 

Bonte,  M.,  Hausfeld,  L.,  Scharke,  W.,  Valente,  G.,  & Formisano,  E.  (2014).  Task -dependent  decoding  of  speaker 

and  vowel  identity  from  auditory  cortical  response  pattern s.  Journal  of  Neuroscience , 34 (13),  4548 -4557. 

Bouchard,  K.  E.,  Mesgarani,  N.,  Johnson,  K.,  & Chang,  E.  F.  (2013).  Functional  organization  of  human 

sensorimotor  cortex  for  speech  articulation.  Nature , 495 (7441),  327 -332. 

Brisson,  V.,  & Tremblay,  P.  (2021).  Improving  speech  perception  in  noise  in  young  and  older  adults  using 

transcranial  magnetic  stimulation.  Brain  and  Language , 222 , 105009. 

Brown,  S.,  Ngan,  E.,  & Liotti,  M.  (2008).  A larynx  area  in  the  human  motor  cortex.  Cerebral  cortex , 18 (4),  837 -

845. 

Bu llock  B.,  Toribio  A.  J.,  González  V.,  Dalola  A.  (2006).  Language  dominance  and  performance  outcomes  in 

bilingual  pronunciation.  In  O’Brien  M.  G.,  Shea  C.,  Archibald  J.  (Eds.),  Proceedings  of  the  8th  Generative 

approaches  to  second  language  acquisition  conf erence  (pp.  9–16).  Cascadilla  Proceedings  Project. 

Caballero -Gaudes,  C.,  & Reynolds,  R.  C.  (2017).  Methods  for  cleaning  the  BOLD  fMRI  signal.  Neuroimage , 154 ,

128 -149. 

Callan,  D.,  Callan,  A.,  Gamez,  M.,  Sato,  M.,  & Kawato,  M.  (2010).  Premotor  cortex  media tes  perceptual 

performance.  NeuroImage , 51 (2),  844 –858.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.02.027 

Callan,  D.  E.,  Jones,  J.  A.,  Callan,  A.  M.,  & Akahane -Yamada,  R.  (2004).  Phonetic  perceptual  identification  by 

native - and  second -language  speakers  dif ferentially  activates  brain  regions  involved  with  acoustic  phonetic 

processing  and  those  involved  with  articulatory –auditory/orosensory  internal  models.  NeuroImage , 22 (3), 

1182 –1194.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2004.03.006 

Callan , D.,  Jones,  J.  A.,  & Callan,  A.  (2014).  Multisensory  and  modality  specific  processing  of  visual  speech  in 

different  regions  of  the  premotor  cortex.  Frontiers  in  Psychology , 5.

https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fpsyg.2014.00389 

Cheung,  C.,  Hamil ton,  L.  S.,  Johnson,  K.,  & Chang,  E.  F.  (2016).  The  auditory  representation  of  speech  sounds 

in  human  motor  cortex.  elife , 5, e12577. 

Chevillet,  M.  A.,  Jiang,  X.,  Rauschecker,  J.  P.,  & Riesenhuber,  M.  (2013).  Automatic  phoneme  category 

selectivity  in  the  dorsal  auditory  stream.  Journal  of  Neuroscience , 33 (12),  5208 -5215. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.06.709780 doi: bioRxiv preprint

30 

Cogan,  G.  B.,  Thesen,  T.,  Carlson,  C.,  Doyle,  W.,  Devinsky,  O.,  & Pesaran,  B.  (2014).  Sensory –motor 

transformations  for  speech  occur  bilaterally.  Nature , 507 (7490),  94 -98. 

Correia,  J.  M.,  Jansma,  B.  M.  B.,  & Bonte,  M.  (2015).  Decoding  Articulatory  Features  from  fMRI  Responses  in 

Dorsal  Speech  Regions.  Journal  of  Neuroscience , 35 (45),  15015 –15025. 

https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0977 -15.2015 

Cox,  R.  W.,  & Hyde,  J.  S.  (1997).  Software  tools  for  analysis  and  visualization  of  fMRI  data.  NMR  in  Biomedicine: 

An  International  Journal  Devoted  to  the  Development  and  Application  of  Magnetic  Resonance  In  Vivo , 10 (4‐5), 

171 -178. 

D’Ausilio,  A.,  Bufalari,  I.,  Salmas,  P.,  & Fadiga,  L.  (2012).  The  role  of  the  motor  system  in  discriminating  normal 

and  degraded  speech  sounds.  Cortex , 48 (7),  882 –887.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2011.05.017 

D’Ausilio,  A.,  Pulvermüller,  F.,  Salmas,  P.,  Bufalari,  I.,  Begliomini,  C.,  & Fadiga,  L.  (2009).  The  Motor  Somatotopy 

of  Speech  Perception.  Current  Biology , 19 (5),  381 –385.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2009.01.017 

Dichter,  B.  K.,  Breshears,  J.  D.,  Leonard,  M.  K.,  & Chang,  E.  F.  (2018).  The  control  of  vocal  pitch  in  human 

laryngeal  motor  cortex.  Cell , 174 (1),  21 -31. 

Diehl,  R.  L.,  Lotto,  A.  J.,  & Holt,  L.  L.  (2004).  Speech  Perception.  Annual  Review  of  Psychology , 55 (Volume  55, 

2004),  149 –179.  https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.psych.55.090902.142028 

Dmitrieva,  X.,  Anton,  J.  L.,  Fairs,  A.,  Ivanova,  B.,  Sein,  J.,  Nazarian,  B.,  ...  & Strijkers,  K.  (2025).  Shared 

phonological  networks  in  frontal  and  temporal  cortex  for  language  production  and  comprehension.  Cerebral 

Cortex , 35 (10),  bhaf275. 

Dole,  M.,  Vilain,  C.,  Haldin,  C.,  Baciu,  M.,  Cousin,  E.,  Lamalle , L.,  ...  & Schwartz,  J.  L.  (2022).  Comparing  the 

selectivity  of  vowel  representations  in  cortical  auditory  vs.  motor  areas:  A repetition -suppression  study. 

Neuropsychologia , 176 , 108392. 

Du,  Y.,  Buchsbaum,  B.  R.,  Grady,  C.  L.,  & Alain,  C.  (2014).  Noise  di fferentially  impacts  phoneme  representations 

in  the  auditory  and  speech  motor  systems.  Proceedings  of  the  National  Academy  of  Sciences , 111 (19),  7126 –

7131.  https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1318738111 

Eichert,  N.,  Papp,  D.,  Mars,  R.  B.,  & Watkins,  K.  E.  (2020).  Mapping  human  laryngeal  motor  cortex  during 

vocalization.  Cerebral  Cortex , 30 (12),  6254 -6269. 

Esteban,  O.,  Markiewicz,  C.  J.,  Blair,  R.  W.,  Moodie,  C.  A.,  Isik,  A.  I.,  Erramuzpe,  A.,  ...  & Gorgolewski,  K.  J.  (2019). 

fMRIPrep:  a robust  preprocessing  pipeli ne  for  functional  MRI.  Nature  methods , 16 (1),  111 -116. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.06.709780 doi: bioRxiv preprint

31 

Evans,  S.,  & Davis,  M.  H.  (2015).  Hierarchical  Organization  of  Auditory  and  Motor  Representations  in  Speech 

Perception:  Evidence  from  Searchlight  Similarity  Analysis.  Cerebral  Cortex  (New  York,  NY) , 25 (12),  4772 –4788. 

https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhv136 

Fedorenko,  E.,  Ivanova,  A.  A.,  & Regev,  T.  I.  (2024).  The  language  network  as  a natural  kind  within  the  broader 

landscape  of  the  human  brain.  Nature  Reviews  Neuroscience , 25 (5),  289 –312. 

https://doi.or g/10.1038/s41583 -024 -00802 -4

Fischer,  M.  H.,  & Zwaan,  R.  A.  (2008).  Embodied  Language:  A Review  of  the  Role  of  the  Motor  System  in 

Language  Comprehension.  Quarterly  Journal  of  Experimental  Psychology , 61 (6),  825 –850. 

https://doi.org/10.1080/174702107016236 05 

Foglia,  L.,  & Wilson,  R.  A.  (2013).  Embodied  cognition.  WIREs  Cognitive  Science , 4(3),  319 –325. 

https://doi.org/10.1002/wcs.1226 

Friston,  K.  J.,  Fletcher,  P.,  Josephs,  O.,  Holmes,  A.  N.  D.  R.  E.  W.,  Rugg,  M.  D.,  & Turner,  R.  (1998).  Event -related 

fMRI:  characterizing  differential  responses.  Neuroimage , 7(1),  30 -40. 

Fuchs,  S.,  & Birkholz,  P.  (2019).  Phonetics  of  consonants.  In  Oxford  Research  Encyclopedia  of  Linguistics .

Grabski,  K.,  Lamalle,  L.,  Vilain,  C.,  Schwartz,  J.  L.,  Vallée,  N.,  Tropres,  I.,  ...  & Sato,  M.  (2012).  Functional  MRI 

assessment  of  orofacial  articulators:  neural  correlates  of  lip,  jaw,  larynx,  and  tongue  movements.  Human  brain 

mapping , 33 (10),  2306 -2321. 

Hall,  D.  A.,  Haggard,  M.  P.,  Akeroyd , M.  A.,  Palmer,  A.  R.,  Summerfield,  A.  Q.,  Elliott,  M.  R.,  ...  & Bowtell,  R.  W. 

(1999).  “Sparse”  temporal  sampling  in  auditory  fMRI.  Human  brain  mapping , 7(3),  213 -223. 

Hickok,  G.  (2014).  The  architecture  of  speech  production  and  the  role  of  the  phoneme  in speech  processing. 

Language,  Cognition  and  Neuroscience , 29 (1),  2–20.  https://doi.org/10.1080/01690965.2013.834370 

Hincapié -Casas,  A.  S.  H.,  Lajnef,  T.,  Pascarella,  A.,  Guiraud -Vinatea,  H.,  Laaksonen,  H.,  Bayle,  D.,  ...  & Boulenger, 

V.  (2021).  Neural  osc illations  track  natural  but  not  artificial  fast  speech:  Novel  insights  from  speech -brain 

coupling  using  MEG.  Neuroimage , 244 , 118577. 

Iacoboni,  M.  (2008).  The  role  of  premotor  cortex  in  speech  perception:  Evidence  from  fMRI  and  rTMS.  Journal 

of  Physiology -Paris , 102 (1 –3),  31 –34.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jphysparis.2008.03.003 

Jackson,  P.  J.  (2000).  Characterisation  of  plosive,  fricative  and  aspiration  components  in  speech  production 

(Doctoral  dissertation,  University  of  Southampton). 

Jenkinson,  M.,  Bannist er,  P.,  Brady,  M.,  & Smith,  S.  (2002).  Improved  optimization  for  the  robust  and  accurate 

linear  registration  and  motion  correction  of  brain  images.  Neuroimage , 17 (2),  825 -841. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.06.709780 doi: bioRxiv preprint

32 

Kriegeskorte,  N.,  Mur,  M.,  & Bandettini,  P.  A.  (2008).  Representational  similari ty  analysis -connecting  the 

branches  of  systems  neuroscience.  Frontiers  in  systems  neuroscience , 2, 249. 

Kühne,  K.,  & Gianelli,  C.  (2019).  Is  Embodied  Cognition  Bilingual?  Current  Evidence  and  Perspectives  of  the 

Embodied  Cognition  Approach  to  Bilingual  Lan guage  Processing.  Frontiers  in  Psychology , 10 .

https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2019.00108 

Laurent,  R.,  Barnaud,  M.  L.,  Schwartz,  J.  L.,  Bessière,  P.,  & Diard,  J.  (2017).  The  complementary  roles  of  auditory 

and  motor  information  evaluated  in  a Bayesian  percep tuo -motor  model  of  speech  perception.  Psychological 

review , 124 (5),  572. 

Liang,  B.,  Li,  Y.,  Zhao,  W.,  & Du,  Y.  (2023).  Bilateral  human  laryngeal  motor  cortex  in  perceptual  decision  of 

lexical  tone  and  voicing  of  consonant.  Nature  Communications , 14 (1),  471 0. 

Liberman,  A.  M.,  Cooper,  F.  S.,  Shankweiler,  D.  P.,  & Studdert -Kennedy,  M.  (1967).  Perception  of  the  speech 

code.  Psychological  Review , 74 (6),  431 –461.  https://doi.org/10.1037/h0020279 

Liberman,  A.  M.,  & Mattingly,  I.  G.  (1985).  The  motor  theory  of  speech  perception  revised.  Cognition , 21 (1), 

1–36.  https://doi.org/10.1016/0010 -0277(85)90021 -6

Liberman,  A.  M.,  & Mattingly,  I.  G.  (1989).  A Specialization  for  Speech  Perception  | Science.  Sc ience , 243 (4890), 

489 –494. 

Löfqvist,  A.  (1995).  Laryngeal  mechanisms  and  interarticulator  timing  in  voiceless  consonant  production. 

Producing  speech:  Contemporary  issues  for  Katherine  Safford  Harris , 99 -116. 

Mathôt,  S.,  Schreij,  D.,  & Theeuwes,  J.  (2012).  OpenSesame:  An  open -source,  graphical  experiment  builder  for 

the  social  sciences.  Behavior  Research  Methods , 44 (2),  314 -324.  doi:10.3758/s13428 -011 -0168 -7

Mathôt,  S.,  & March,  J.  (2022).  Conduct ing  linguistic  experiments  online  with  OpenSesame  and  OSWeb. 

Language  Learning . doi:10.1111/lang.12509 

Mesgarani,  N.,  Cheung,  C.,  Johnson,  K.,  & Chang,  E.  F.  (2014).  Phonetic  Feature  Encoding  in  Human  Supe rior 

Temporal  Gyrus.  Science  (New  York,  N.Y.) , 343 (6174),  1006 –1010.  https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1245994 

Mesgarani,  N.,  Cheung,  C.,  Johnson,  K.,  & Chang,  E.  F.  (2014).  Phonetic  feature  encoding  in  human  superior 

temporal  gyrus.  Science , 343 (6174),  1006 -1010. 

Meyer,  J.,  Dentel,  L.,  & Meunier,  F.  (2013).  Speech  recognition  in  natural  background  noise.  PloS  one , 8(11), 

e79279. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.06.709780 doi: bioRxiv preprint

33 

Möttönen,  R.,  & Watkins,  K.  E.  (2009).  Motor  Representations  of  Articulators  Contribute  to  Categorical 

Perception  of  Speech  Sounds.  Journal  of  Neuroscience , 29 (31),  9819 –9825. 

https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.6018 -08.2009 

Moulin -Frier,  C.,  Laurent,  R.,  Bessière,  P.,  Schwartz,  J.  L.,  & Diard,  J.  (2012).  Adverse  conditions  improve 

distinguishability  of  auditory,  motor,  and  perceptuo -mo tor  theories  of  speech  perception:  An  exploratory 

Bayesian  modelling  study.  Language  and  Cognitive  Processes , 27 (7 –8),  1240 –1263. 

doi:10.1080/01690965.2011.645313 

Murakami,  T.,  Kell,  C.  A.,  Restle,  J.,  Ugawa,  Y.,  & Ziemann,  U.  (2015).  Left  Dorsal  Speech  Stream  Components 

and  Their  Contribution  to  Phonological  Processing.  Journal  of  Neuroscience , 35 (4),  1411 –1422. 

https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0246 -14.2015 

Murakami,  T.,  Restle,  J.,  & Ziemann,  U.  (2011).  Observation -execution  matching  and  action  inhibiti on  in  human 

primary  motor  cortex  during  viewing  of  speech -related  lip  movements  or  listening  to  speech. 

Neuropsychologia , 49 (7),  2045 –2054.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2011.03.034 

Nili,  H.,  Wingfield,  C.,  Walther,  A.,  Su,  L.,  Marslen -Wilson,  W.,  & Kriegeskorte,  N.  (2014).  A toolbox  for 

representational  similarity  analysis.  PLoS  computational  biology , 10 (4),  e1003553. 

Nuttall,  H.  E.,  Kennedy -Higgins,  D.,  Devlin,  J.  T.,  & Adank,  P.  (2017).  The  role  of  hearing  ability  and  speech 

distorti on  in  the  facilitation  of  articulatory  motor  cortex.  Neuropsychologia , 94 , 13 –22. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2016.11.016 

Nuttall,  H.  E.,  Kennedy -Higgins,  D.,  Devlin,  J.  T.,  & Adank,  P.  (2018).  Modulation  of  intra - and  inter -hemispheric 

conn ectivity  between  primary  and  premotor  cortex  during  speech  perception.  Brain  and  Language , 187 , 74 –

82.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bandl.2017.12.002 

Nuttall,  H.  E.,  Kennedy -Higgins,  D.,  Hogan,  J.,  Devlin,  J.  T.,  & Adank,  P.  (2016).  The  effect  of  speech  disto rtion 

on  the  excitability  of  articulatory  motor  cortex.  NeuroImage , 128 , 218 –226. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.12.038 

Oldfield,  R.  C.  (1971).  Edinburgh  handedness  inventory.  Journal  of  Abnormal  Psychology .

Osnes,  B.,  Hugdahl,  K.,  & Specht,  K.  (2011).  Effective  connectivity  analysis  demonstrates  involvement  of 

premotor  cortex  during  speech  perception.  NeuroImage , 54 (3),  2437 –2445. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.09.078 

Peelle,  J.  E.,  Eason,  R.  J.,  Schmitter,  S.,  Schwarzbauer,  C.,  & Dav is,  M.  H.  (2010).  Evaluating  an  acoustically 

quiet  EPI  sequence  for  use  in  fMRI  studies  of  speech  and  auditory  processing.  Neuroimage , 52 (4),  1410 -

1419. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.06.709780 doi: bioRxiv preprint

34 

Perrier,  P.  (2006).  About  speech  motor  control  complexity.  Speech  production:  Models,  phonetic  processe s, 

and  techniques , 13 -25. 

Petersen,  N.  R.  (2004,  August  20;  modified  2005,  August  23).  create_waveforms  [Praat  script].  UCLA 

Phonetics  Lab  Archive. 

https://phonetics.linguistics.ucla.edu/OldPhoneticsResources/praatscript/noise_and_speech/create_wavefo 

rms. txt 

Perrachione,  T.  K.,  & Ghosh,  S.  S.  (2013).  Optimized  design  and  analysis  of  sparse -sampling  fMRI  experiments. 

Frontiers  in  neuroscience , 7, 55. 

Preisig,  B.  C.,  Riecke,  L.,  & Hervais -Adelman,  A.  (2022).  Speech  sound  categorization:  The  contribution  of  non -

auditory  and  auditory  cortical  regions.  NeuroImage , 258 , 119375. 

Price,  C.  J.  (2012).  A review  and  synthesis  of  the  first  20  years  of  PET  and  fMRI  studies  of  heard  speech,  spoken 

language  and  reading.  NeuroImage , 62 (2),  816 –847.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.04.062 

Pulvermüller,  F.,  & Fadiga,  L.  (2010).  Active  perception:  Sensorimotor  circuits  as  a cortical  basis  for  language. 

Nature  Reviews  Neuroscience , 11 (5),  5.  https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn2811 

Pulvermüller,  F.,  & Fa diga,  L.  (2016).  Brain  language  mechanisms  built  on  action  and  perception.  In 

Neurobiology  of  language  (pp.  311 -324).  Academic  Press. 

Pulvermüller,  F.,  Huss,  M.,  Kherif,  F.,  Moscoso  del  Prado  Martin,  F.,  Hauk,  O.,  & Shtyrov,  Y.  (2006).  Motor  cortex 

maps  ar ticulatory  features  of  speech  sounds.  Proceedings  of  the  National  Academy  of  Sciences , 103 (20),  7865 –

7870.  https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0509989103 

Rauschecker,  J.  P.,  & Scott,  S.  K.  (2009).  Maps  and  streams  in  the  auditory  cortex:  Nonhuman  primates 

illumin ate  human  speech  processing.  Nature  Neuroscience , 12 (6),  718 –724.  https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.2331 

Ritchie,  J.  B.,  Bracci,  S.,  & de  Beeck,  H.  O.  (2017).  Avoiding  illusory  effects  in  representational  similarity  analysis: 

What  (not)  to  do  with  the  diagonal.  NeuroImage , 148 , 197 -200. 

Sato,  M.,  Tremblay,  P.,  & Gracco,  V.  L.  (2009).  A mediating  role  of  the  premotor  cortex  in  phoneme 

segmentation.  Brain  and  language , 111 (1),  1-7. 

Schmitz,  J.,  Bartoli,  E.,  Maffongelli,  L.,  Fadiga,  L.,  Sebastian -Galles,  N.,  & D’Ausi lio,  A.  (2019).  Motor  cortex 

compensates  for  lack  of  sensory  and  motor  experience  during  auditory  speech  perception.  Neuropsychologia ,

128 , 290 –296.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2018.01.006 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.06.709780 doi: bioRxiv preprint

35 

Schomers,  M.  R.,  & Pulvermüller,  F.  (2016).  Is  the  Sensorimotor  Cortex  Relevant  for  Speech  Perception  and 

Understanding?  An  Integrative  Review.  Frontiers  in  Human  Neuroscience , 10 .

https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fnhum.2016.00435 

Schwartz,  J.  L.,  Sato,  M.,  & Fadiga,  L.  (2008).  The  commo n language  of  speech  perception  and  action:  a

neurocognitive  perspective.  Revue  française  de  linguistique  appliquée , (2),  9-22. 

Schwartz,  J. -L.,  Basirat,  A.,  Ménard,  L.,  & Sato,  M.  (2012).  The  Perception -for -Action -Control  Theory  (PACT):  A

perceptuo -motor  theory  of  speech  perception.  Journal  of  Neurolinguistics , 25 (5),  336 –354. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneuroling.2009.12.004 

Sheng,  J.,  Zheng,  L.,  Lyu,  B.,  Cen,  Z.,  Qin,  L.,  Tan,  L.  H.,  ...  & Gao,  J.  H.  (2019).  The  cortical  maps  of  hierarchical 

linguistic  st ructures  during  speech  perception.  Cerebral  cortex , 29 (8),  3232 -3240. 

Skipper,  J.  I.,  Devlin,  J.  T.,  & Lametti,  D.  R.  (2017).  The  hearing  ear  is  always  found  close  to  the  speaking  tongue: 

Review  of  the  role  of  the  motor  system  in  speech  perception.  Brain  and  Language , 164 , 77 –105. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bandl.2016.10.004 

Smalle,  E.  H.  M.,  Rogers,  J.,  & Möttönen,  R.  (2015).  Dissociating  Contributions  of  the  Motor  Cortex  to  Speech 

Perception  and  Response  Bias  by  Using  Transcranial  Magnetic  Stimulation.  Cer ebral  Cortex , 25 (10),  3690 –

3698. 

Szenkovits,  G.,  Peelle,  J.  E.,  Norris,  D.,  & Davis,  M.  H.  (2012).  Individual  differences  in  premotor  and  motor 

recruitment  during  speech  perception.  Neuropsychologia , 50 (7),  1380 –1392. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychol ogia.2012.02.023 

Tamura,  S.,  Hirose,  N.,  Mitsudo,  T.,  Hoaki,  N.,  Nakamura,  I.,  Onitsuka,  T.,  & Hirano,  Y.  (2022).  Multi -modal 

imaging  of  the  auditory -larynx  motor  network  for  voicing  perception.  NeuroImage , 251 , 118981. 

Tourville,  J.  A.,  & Guenther,  F.  H.  (2011).  The  DIVA  model:  A neural  theory  of  speech  acquisition  and 

production.  Language  and  Cognitive  Processes , 26 (7),  952 –981. 

https://doi.org/10.1080/01690960903498424 

Toyoda,  G.,  Brown,  E.  C.,  Matsuzaki,  N.,  Kojima,  K.,  Nishida,  M.,  & Asano,  E.  (2014).  Electrocorticographic 

correlates  of  overt  articulation  of  44  English  phonemes:  intracranial  recording  in  children  with  focal  epilepsy. 

Clinical  Neurophysiology , 125 (6),  1129 -1137. 

Tseng,  T.,  Krzonowski,  J.,  Brozzoli,  C.,  Roy,  A.  C.,  & Boulenger,  V.  (202 6).  Embodied  speech:  sensorimotor 

contributions  to  native  and  non -native  phoneme  processing  and  learning.  Neurobiology  of  Language , 1-25. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.06.709780 doi: bioRxiv preprint

36 

Tzourio -Mazoyer,  N.,  Landeau,  B.,  Papathanassiou,  D.,  Crivello,  F.,  Etard,  O.,  Delcro ix,  N.,  Mazoyer,  B.,  & Joliot, 

M.  (2002).  Automated  Anatomical  Labeling  of  Activations  in  SPM  Using  a Macroscopic  Anatomical  Parcellation 

of  the  MNI  MRI  Single -Subject  Brain.  NeuroImage , 15 (1),  273 –289.  https://doi.org/10.1006/nimg.2001.0978 

Wilson,  S.  M.,  & Iacoboni,  M.  (2006).  Neural  responses  to  non -native  phonemes  varying  in  producibility: 

Evidence  for  the  sensorimotor  nature  of  speech  perception.  NeuroImage , 33 (1),  316 –325. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2006.05.032 

Wilson,  S.  M.,  Saygin,  A.  P.,  Sereno,  M.  I.,  & Iacoboni,  M.  (2004).  Listening  to  speech  activates  motor  areas 

involved  in  speech  production.  Nature  Neuroscience , 7(7),  701 –702.  https://doi.org/10.1038/nn1263 

Zheng,  Y.,  Zhang,  J.,  Yang,  Y.,  & Xu,  M.  (2025).  Neural  representation  of  sens orimotor  features  in  language -

motor  areas  during  auditory  and  visual  perception.  Communications  Biology , 8(1),  41.