Title: Disambiguation of two-tone images reveals semantic contributions to object recognition in the EEG

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.64898/2026.06.05.730193v1.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 44

Markdown Content:
Disambiguation of two-tone images reveals semantic contributions to object recognition in the EEG 

Roman Kessler ‡. 1,,2 ✉ , Johanna J. Finnemann ‡, 2, and Michael A. Skeide 1 

> ‡

equal contribution  

> 1

Institute of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 

Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel, 

Niemannsweg 147, 24105 Kiel, Germany,  

> 2

Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, 

Stephanstraße 1A, 04103 Leipzig, Germany  

> ✉

e-mail:  roman.kessler@uksh.de 

1

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.05.730193 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Abstract 

Electrophysiological responses to visual objects carry information about stimulus identity and semantic category, but it remains di ff icult to know whether such information represents semantic knowledge or merely regularities in physical image features. Here, we presented two-tone images while recording EEG to dissociate the learned semantic concept from physical stimulus properties in the electrophysiological signal. Seventeen healthy participants completed a semantic disambiguation experiment with three phases: ambiguous two-tone images before disambiguation, their corresponding grayscale photographs, and the same two-tone images after disambiguation. We quantified representational change using Mahalanobis distances between EEG response patterns. After disambiguation, EEG responses to learned two-tone images became more similar to the response of their photo counterparts, indicating semantic enrichment of stimulus-specific representations. This eff ect emerged approximately 100 ms after stimulus onset and persisted across an extended time window. However, we found no evidence for an increase in semantic category-level responses after disambiguation. Furthermore, responses to spontaneously recognized two-tone images did not already show stronger alignment with the responses to their corresponding photo images before explicit visual disambiguation was performed. Together, these findings show that EEG can capture learned semantic modulations of responses to visually degraded stimuli, while also indicating that low-level visual properties dominate the representational structure. Two-tone images can therefore serve as a useful paradigm for probing semantic learning in the EEG, and may guide future research in children and patient populations whose ability to behaviorally confirm learning is limited. 

2

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.05.730193 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Introduction 

Patterns of brain activity carry information about the semantic content of visual stimuli (Carlson et al., 2011; Ferrante et al., 2024; Grootswagers et al., 2019; Huth et al., 2012; Kaneshiro et al., 2015; Kay et al., 2008; Naselaris et al., 2011; Zhang et al., 2018). However, when neural activity is used to distinguish between visual stimuli it is often unclear whether the signals carry information about semantic content or merely variation in low-level visual features (Lützow Holm et al., 2024). As a consequence, studying category discrimination on a neural level requires a method to separate the semantics of the object (e.g., the category) from the remaining image properties, i.e., the low-level image statistics. This is particularly challenging, as physically harmonizing all low-level image features of visual stimuli inevitably incorporates equating the entire images. For example, cat pictures will always encompass one or more low-level image statistics that are di ff erent from those of brutalist architecture. 

The issue of identifying the semantic content of the neural response is particularly relevant for studies of image category perception in infants or clinical cohorts where behavioural confirmation of conceptual knowledge is challenging. By separating low-level image statistics from semantics one could assess on a neurophysiological level whether object categories can be distinguished at a particular age, or whether a learning intervention changes the semantic neural representation. Such a separation of low-level features and semantics could be achieved on an analytical level, for instance by including low-level image statistics as nuisance variables in the computation of the similarity metrics (O ʼDoherty, 2026). Previous studies, however, only controlled a few out of many possible low-level features that constitute an image in its entirety. A di ff erent approach is to experimentally separate the image statistics from the concept in the paradigm design, for instance, by changing the concept associated with the same physical stimulus (Enge et al., 2023). 

In the present study we followed this latter approach and leveraged two-tone (Mooney) images (Mooney, 1957), whose interpretations may shift from ambiguous to meaningful only when observers are provided with supplementary information that reveals the underlying object, such as the corresponding photo image (i.e., template) or verbal instruction (Dolan et al., 1997; Ishikawa & Mogi, 2011; Samaha et al., 2018). This sudden shift from ambiguity to meaningful perception is an inherent feature of the visual system ʼs hierarchical and recurrent architecture, in which high-level object knowledge can swiftly reshape the interpretation of impoverished sensory input. For instance, high-level object representations engaged during two-tone disambiguation have been shown to 

3

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.05.730193 doi: bioRxiv preprint

interact with early visual areas, indicating bidirectional influences between conceptual interpretation and sensory processing (Teufel et al., 2018). Because the two-tone stimuli remain physically unchanged across the two knowledge states, they off er the opportunity to vary semantic interpretation without altering low-level visual features. 

Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) has revealed that neural responses to disambiguated two-tone images and corresponding photo images align in a widespread cortical network (González-García et al., 2018; Hsieh et al., 2010). For electroencephalographic (EEG) response profiles, this alignment is less clear. Although recognition is associated with power changes in di ff erent frequency bands (Castelhano et al., 2013; Samaha et al., 2018), other EEG studies investigating the alignment of neural responses to two-tone images to their photo image counterparts showed small eff ects in their preliminary results and were not further pursued (Petrov et al., 2012). Another study demonstrated such an alignment using magnetoencephalography (MEG) (Flounders et al., 2019). However, EEG is often the only suitable method to investigate challenging cohorts such as infants or certain clinical patients. EEG also o ff ers high temporal resolution that allows rapid presentations of stimuli, opening the opportunity to cover a larger stimulus space than previous studies (Hsieh et al., 2010; Petrov et al., 2012). 

Establishing when EEG response patterns reflect semantic knowledge such as stimulus identity or category instead of merely the low-level stimulus properties is a prerequisite for interpreting representational analyses. The present study therefore aims at demonstrating how manipulation of the semantic concept changes the electrophysiological representational structure. To this end, we presented two-tone images and their photo image counterparts to a group of healthy participants during EEG recording. First, we hypothesized that, after disambiguation, neural responses to two-tone images would become more similar to responses elicited by their corresponding photo images, indicating knowledge-dependent changes in stimulus representations, i.e., neural alignment or semantic enrichment. Second, we predicted that neural responses would exhibit category selectivity, such that neural responses to images belonging to the same semantic category (e.g., cows) would become more similar after disambiguation than neural responses to images from di ff erent categories. Third, we hypothesized that neural responses to two-tone images that were spontaneously recognized prior to disambiguation would converge toward neural responses to their respective photo images, and such convergence would not happen with non-recognized stimuli (i.e., spontaneous alignment). 

4

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.05.730193 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Our results demonstrate an alignment of electrophysiological responses to two-tone images and their corresponding photographs after disambiguation. However, we found evidence against the semantic category information being encoded in the electrophysiological signal after disambiguation. Finally, we found evidence against enhanced alignment between neural responses to spontaneously recognized two-tone images and their corresponding template images. 

5

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.05.730193 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Results 

Seventeen participants completed an EEG experiment consisting of three phases. In the pre-disambiguation phase (PRE), participants viewed ten di ff erent two-tone images from five semantic categories (cow, croissant, hands, human, penguin; Fig. S1) presented using rapid serial visual presentation at 2.5 Hz (Fig. 1). In the template phase (TPL), participants viewed the corresponding grayscale photo images presented at the same rate. In the post-disambiguation phase (POST), participants were again exposed to the same two-tone images, but they had now been informed about the identity of each image. Disambiguation was performed prior to the POST phase (Fig. 1). Participants provided verbal responses regarding the identity of the two-tone images after both the PRE and POST phases. These responses were used to assess recognition and to classify stimuli into di ff erent groups, i.e., (re-)learned, not (re-)learned, and spontaneously recognized (Table  1). 

6

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.05.730193 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Fig. 1 | Experimental design. The experimental session was divided into three phases (upper panel), each comprising three experimental blocks (middle panel). Two-tone images were presented in the PRE- and POST-disambiguation phases, and their corresponding photo images were presented in the template (TPL) phase. Within each block, images were presented in pseudorandom order at a rate of 2.5  Hz (250  ms stimulus, 150  ms inter-stimulus-interval, lower panel). Before the TPL phase and before each POST block, the two-tone images were disambiguated by a continuous fade between the two-tone image and its corresponding photo image (light bulbs). After PRE and POST phases, the participants were asked about stimulus identity (speech bubbles). 

Behavioral results 

All participants completed the entire experiment, but varied regarding which and how many stimuli they spontaneously recognized before disambiguation, which they successfully learned or re-learned after disambiguation, or which they did not learn. Table  1 illustrates how participant’s responses to the questions were categorized. Participants spontaneously recognized 0 to 3 out of 10 stimuli, were not able to learn 0 to 1 out of 10 stimuli, and learned or re-learned the remaining 6 to 10 out of 10 stimuli according to their self-reports. Figure 2B illustrates how stimuli were categorized for each participant (vertical panels). Table  S1 further summarizes how many participants did or did not (re-)learn, or spontaneously recognized each stimulus. 

Table 1 | Categorization of responses to the stimuli. The responses given during the rating after the PRE and POST phases were used to categorize each stimulus for each participant. The questions were as follows: Rating 1 (PRE): “Did you recognize anything in this stimulus when it was shown during the previous runs? And if so, what did you see?” Rating 2 (POST): “Did you see the learned stimulus identity in the images within the previous runs?” Other than the illustrated combinations of responses did not occur. 

Rating 1 response (PRE)  Rating 2 response (POST)  Category 

No  Yes  Learned 

Yes (but false)  Yes  Re-learned 

Yes (correct)  Yes  Spontaneous 

No  No  Not learned 

Yes (but false)  No  Not re-learned 

7

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.05.730193 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Semantic enrichment 

We analyzed how the neural responses to all stimuli di ff ered across experimental phases for each participant, with a focus on learned and re-learned stimuli. First, we computed the Mahalanobis distance of neural responses between POST and TPL, and subtracted it from the Mahalanobis distance between PRE and TPL, all within a post-stimulus onset time-window of 0.1  – 0.5  s. This di ff erence measure quantifies what we label semantic enrichment (eq. 1a, cf. Methods). The 400  ms-window was chosen to cover one stimulus cycle at a 2.5  Hz presentation rate, starting shortly after stimulus onset, when initial neural responses to that stimulus can be detected. The window ends shortly after the onset of the next stimulus and thus before the signal is likely dominated by the neural response to the next stimulus. The calculation includes subtracting stimulus-unspecific, phase-dependent components via cross-stimulus pairings (eq.  1b, cf. Methods). A positive semantic enrichment value indicates that the neural response to the two-tone image became more similar to the neural response to the template image. All analyses in the present study were conducted separately for each participant, as individual di ff erences between neural representations were expected. The participant-wise results were passed to the group level for statistical analysis. Pair-wise statistical analyses were always one-tailed in the direction of the respective hypothesis. 

Figure  2A illustrates the average semantic enrichment value of each participant, including all learned and re-learned stimuli per participant. We obtained a Bayes Factor (BF) of 20.2, indicating strong evidence that the true value is positive. A one-sided Wilcoxon signed-rank test confirmed that semantic enrichment was significantly greater than zero (V = 136, p = .0016). The observed e ff ect size was g  = 0.76 with a 95% confidence interval (CI) of [0.23, 1.27].  Figure 2B illustrates the semantic enrichment values for each stimulus and participant. Vertical panels depict how each stimulus was classified according to Table  1 for each participant. (Re-)learned stimuli revealed positive semantic enrichment values. As most stimuli were successfully (re-)learned, or already spontaneously 

8

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.05.730193 doi: bioRxiv preprint

recognized, comparisons between semantic enrichment of (re-)learned stimuli and stimuli that were not (re-)learned were omitted. 

Our next step was to compare Mahalanobis distance values across the experimental phases, by contrasting electrophysiological distance values corresponding to PRE vs. TPL, POST vs. TPL, and PRE vs. POST. We used the distance values of all learned and re-learned stimuli across participants to estimate a multidimensional scaling model with only one dimension. Figure 2C illustrates that PRE and POST stimuli are situated in vicinity to each other, whereas TPL stimuli are situated further away. POST stimuli are situated slightly closer to the TPL stimuli than the PRE stimuli are. The distance from POST to TPL was over 9  times the distance from PRE to POST stimuli, indicating that disambiguation only slightly alters the electrophysiological response to two-tone images. Figure  S2 illustrates all raw distance values from all stimuli. Distances between the PRE and POST electrophysiological responses were consistently lower than the distances between responses to PRE and TPL, or POST and TPL. As the PRE and POST stimuli only di ff er in terms of their semantic concept, whereas the other comparisons also di ff er in their visual features, this result illustrates that the low-level image statistics explain a larger proportion of variance in the electrophysiological signal, whereas the concept – similar 

in POST and TPL phase – does not  (Petrov et al., 2012) .

To explore the temporal trajectory of semantic enrichment, we applied the same formula (eq.  1a) for 

consecutive 10–millisecond time-windows of the experimental trials  (Teichmann, 2022) . Figure  2D 

illustrates the BF for time-point-wise semantic enrichment across participants, spanning 3 stimulus cycles (-0.4  to  0.8  s) around stimulus onset. Evidence for semantic enrichment surpasses the evidence of the alternative (i.e., semantic enrichment being zero or negative) shortly after stimulus onset. The BF fluctuates in a range between roughly 1 and 30 until 800  ms after stimulus onset, indicating semantic enrichment persists even extending beyond the next stimulus presentation cycle. E ff ect sizes (Hedges’  g) vary roughly between 0.25 and 0.75 starting approximately 100  ms after stimulus onset (Fig.  S3B). The mean semantic enrichment value across participants peaks between 300 and 400  ms after stimulus onset, and remains positive until the end of the investigated time window (Fig.  S3C). 

9

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.05.730193 doi: bioRxiv preprint

To better understand possible spatial origins of semantic enrichment responses, we computed electrode-wise semantic enrichment values, using the entire time-window of interest (0.1  – 0.5  s). Moderate evidence for semantic enrichment could only be observed at one right temporal electrode (Fig.  2E), i.e. at electrode T8 (BF  = 5.1), with the second largest evidence at CP6 (BF  = 2.6). Remaining electrodes showed BFs smaller than 2. 

10 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.05.730193 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Fig. 2 | Semantic enrichment. A: Participant-wise semantic enrichment of (re-)learned stimuli. The y axis illustrates the di ff erence (PRE – POST) in neural response dissimilarity to the template image, i.e., semantic 

11 

.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.05.730193 doi: bioRxiv preprint enrichment in the window 0.1  – 0.5  s post-stimulus onset, averaged across each participant’s learned & re-learned images. Boxplot corpus illustrates 0.25, 0.5, and 0.75 quantiles. Whiskers span all data points within 1.5 times the inter-quantile-range. BF = Bayes Factor. Asterisks indicate significance levels (** p  < 0.01). 

B: Stimulus- and participant-wise semantic enrichment values. Vertical panels illustrate the di ff erent stimulus categories based on participant ratings (Table  1). The x axes depict the di ff erent participants. The y axes illustrate the di ff erence (PRE – POST) in neural response dissimilarity to the template image, i.e., semantic enrichment. Shapes illustrate the di ff erent stimulus images. C: Estimated multidimensional scaling of distance values of learned and re-learned stimuli (with only one dimension). D & E : Temporal trajectory and spatial topography of semantic enrichment. BFs illustrate the evidence for a positive semantic enrichment value in contrast to a zero or negative value. D: BFs (y axis, logarithmic scale) were computed for 10-millisecond time-windows (x axis), across all electrodes. The horizontal solid line at y  = 1 indicates the points where the likelihood for a positive semantic enrichment value is equal to the likelihood of a null or negative semantic enrichment value. Dashed horizontal lines indicate thresholds at which one hypothesis is 10  times more likely than the other. The solid vertical line indicates the onset of the stimulus of interest. Dotted vertical lines indicate the onsets of (randomized) preceding and succeeding stimuli. E: BFs were computed for each electrode individually and across the entire time window of interest (0.1  – 0.5  s). Intensity-mapped values are on a logarithmic scale. 

Category selectivity 

Another question we aspired to answer was whether disambiguation not only leads to stimulus-level encoding (i.e., semantic enrichment), but also triggers a semantic category-level encoding. As category selectivity should only emerge in learned two-tone images, we only focused on the (re-)learned stimuli. Specifically, we determined if the neural responses of two di ff erent (re-)learned two-tone stimuli belonging to the same category (e.g., penguin_06 and penguin_07, Table  S2) were more similar (less dissimilar) to each other, than to neural responses to stimuli of other categories. Category selectivity was computed separately for each experimental phase and participant (eq.  2, cf. Methods). 

Figure 3A illustrates the category selectivity values for each participant and experimental phase. Experimental phases di ff ered in category selectivity (Friedman-Test: 𝝌 2(2) = 17.29, p = .00018). Category selectivity was not significantly higher in the POST than in the PRE phase (V = 51, p = .8876), with an eff ect size of g  = -0.24 (95% CI  = [-0.70, 0.22]). Bayesian analysis also revealed evidence against an increase in category selectivity via disambiguation (BF  = 0.1346). As expected, the TPL phase exhibited 

12 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.05.730193 doi: bioRxiv preprint

higher category selectivity than the PRE phase (V  = 142, p  = 0.0006, g  = 0.92 95%  CI  = [0.36, 1.46], BF  = 70.7), and the POST phase (V  = 150, p  = 0.0001, g  = 0.95 95%  CI  = [0.38, 1.50], BF  = 91.1  ). P  values were false-discovery-rate adjusted using Benjamini-Hochberg correction (Benjamini & Hochberg, 1995) . Note that only the PRE vs. POST comparison is truly unbiased by low-level visual di ff erences (cf. Discussion). 

Fig. 3 | Category selectivity and spontaneous alignment. A: Category selectivity. The x axis illustrates the di ff erent experimental phases (PRE-disambiguation, POST-disambiguation, TPL: Template). The y axis illustrates the category selectivity (between-category minus within-category distances) for each participant. 

B:  Spontaneous alignment. The x axis shows the two groups of stimuli, either those not recognized or those spontaneously recognized in the PRE phase. The y axis illustrates the participant-wise average dissimilarity of neural responses to those of their respective template images. BF = Bayes Factor. Asterisks indicate levels of significance (*** p  < 0.001; NS. not significant) 

13 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.05.730193 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Spontaneous alignment 

The final step was to find out whether spontaneous recognition in the PRE phase is already represented in the neural response. In particular, we tested whether the neural responses to recognized stimuli were more similar to the neural responses of the respective photographs than those of their non-recognized counterparts. Accordingly, we calculated the mean dissimilarities between neural responses of recognized and non-recognized images for the 13 participants who spontaneously recognized one or more stimuli correctly (eq. 3, cf. Methods). 

Figure 3B illustrates the participant-wise dissimilarities of the PRE neural responses to the TPL neural responses. The responses were aggregated into two groups, reflecting whether stimuli were spontaneously recognized before disambiguation or not. We found no evidence for a di ff erence (V  = 39, p = 0.6823, g = -0.12 95%  CI  = [-0.63,0.39]). Bayesian analysis revealed a Bayes Factor of 0.203, indicating evidence against a spontaneous alignment of electrophysiological responses to recognized stimuli before disambiguation towards their photo image counterparts. 

14 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.05.730193 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Discussion 

In the present study, we examined electrophysiological neural responses to two-tone images, and how they align towards the responses to their photo image counterparts after participants have been informed about the stimulus identity. We found that electrophysiological responses to two-tone images – in a time window from 0.1 to 0.5  seconds post-stimulus onset – aligned more closely with the response to the photo images after the image content has been learned (hypothesis 1). This semantic enrichment started at around 100  ms post-stimulus onset and persisted the current and the next stimulus cycle. On the other hand, we found evidence against the measured neural responses encoding the semantic category (hypothesis 2), as responses to di ff erent two-tone stimuli of the same category did not align after disambiguation. Lastly, we found evidence against the hypothesis that spontaneously recognized two-tone images elicited neural responses more similar to the (yet unseen) template images (hypothesis 3). 

Electrophysiological responses to two-tone images converge to their photo image counterparts 

Our results show an alignment of electrophysiological responses to two-tone images with those of the corresponding photo images (Fig.  2). This e ff ect is in line with what has been found in fMRI studies focused on the representational alignment of hemodynamic responses (Hsieh et al., 2010) . A positron emission tomography study illustrated such an e ff ect indirectly by demonstrating larger activation of 

face-selective regions after disambiguation of Mooney face stimuli  (Dolan et al., 1997) . Another recent 

MEG study demonstrated a better separability of stimulus responses after disambiguation (Flounders et al., 2019) . However, most recent analyses were likely not able to fully separate the stimulus-specific alignment to similarity alignments which are stimulus-unspecific and attributable to the experimental phase, which we mitigate by subtracting this unspecific component from our data (eq.  1b, cf. Methods, Fig.  S4). 

While we found positive semantic enrichment values of (re-)learned stimuli, a statistical evaluation of those values for stimuli that were not (re-)learned was precluded by their limited number. However, 

15 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.05.730193 doi: bioRxiv preprint

the semantic enrichment values of spontaneously recognized stimuli were also above zero (Fig.  2B). Some semantic enrichment in those spontaneously recognized images can be anticipated as the stimuli in question were also disambiguated and the semantic concept was refined throughout the course of the experiment (Fig.  1). Semantic enrichment in spontaneously recognized images would also parallel the absence of spontaneous alignment in the PRE phase (Fig.  3B), indicating that template exposure is required for neural responses to align with their corresponding photo image responses (see below). 

By demonstrating this neural alignment in the EEG, the present findings establish two-tone Mooney images as an experimental tool for separating image semantics from low-level visual features in neurophysiological paradigms. EEG makes this approach applicable to populations in which fMRI scanning is di ff icult, such as small children or some patients in a clinical setting. In fact, experiments in young children are usually limited by short experimental times, the absence of a behavioral response, and the interpretability of behavioral proxies such as looking times (Doi et al., 2009) . While the recognition of Mooney faces (without disambiguation) has been demonstrated in 6  month-olds based on looking times (Doi et al., 2009; Otsuka et al., 2012) it is unclear if semantic disambiguation works at this age or in patients with diverse neurological conditions. At the same time, experimental paradigms applied to other cohorts may be less sensitive. For the present study we maximized within-participant sensitivity by presenting 240 repetitions per stimulus and experimental phase, i.e., 2,400 trials per experimental phase and thus 7,200 trials in total. Accordingly, when less experimentation time is available, an alternative strategy would be to reduce the number of di ff erent two-tone stimuli to facilitate successful learning of a small stimulus set instead. 

The neural correlates of semantic enrichment 

The strength of evidence for semantic enrichment varied over time in a prolonged time window starting 100  ms after stimulus onset and continuing at least until 800  ms (Fig.  2D, Fig.  S3). In a previous MEG study, a related e ff ect was reported in a later time window (>500ms) (Flounders et al., 2019) ,

16 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.05.730193 doi: bioRxiv preprint

although it is not clear if this is driven by a slower stimulation rate (<  0.15 Hz) and longer stimulus presentation (2  s), or based on analytical disparities. Rapid serial visual presentation could, however, artificially shorten this window. For this reason, we deliberately limited our main analyses to the time window of 0.1 to 0.5 seconds. 

The strongest contribution to semantic enrichment in the time window of interest likely stems from right temporal electrodes (Fig.  2E, electrodes T8 and CP6), a region known to be relevant for semantic processing (Chen et al., 2016; Snowden et al., 2018). Studies using fMRI found semantic enrichment eff ects in bilateral early visual, lateral occipital and parietal cortices, as well as in bilateral networks distributed across the entire neocortex (González-García et al., 2018; Hsieh et al., 2010) . Our electrode-level analysis did not reveal strong semantic enrichment e ff ects on single electrodes, probably because single electrode analyses using EEG neither have the same spatial resolution as other recording techniques, nor are they as sensitive as the combined analysis across electrodes . It is therefore likely that subtle enrichment e ff ects aggregate across a large-scale cortical network, leading to high evidence in the whole brain analysis (Fig.  2A). 

The stimulus, but not the category is encoded after semantic disambiguation 

Despite using pairs of stimuli belonging to similar semantic categories (e.g., penguins), our analyses did not reveal that isolated category information is encoded in the neural signal. Although participants did not perform an explicit category perception task, the categories (cow, croissant, hands, human, penguin) were named during disambiguation and understood by the participants. Whether EEG is not able to capture signals related to feature-independent category signals or whether electrophysiological category selectivity requires low-level visual features to be present cannot be answered with the current experiment. Consistent with the latter interpretation it has been shown that EEG decoding performance for image concepts is substantially higher when using visual images than when using their written or spoken counterparts (Simanova et al., 2010). Studies using two-tone 

17 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.05.730193 doi: bioRxiv preprint

stimuli in experiments with other techniques such as fMRI or MEG did not investigate category selectivity (Flounders et al., 2019; Hsieh et al., 2010). 

The present experiment was designed to perfectly equalize the low-level visual features to analyse semantic enrichment, by applying the same physical stimuli and only varying the perceptual state (recognized vs. not recognized). However, low-level visual features naturally still di ff ered within and between categories, so two two-tone cows would have higher similarity with respect to their low-level visual features than a two-tone cow compared to a two-tone penguin. Likewise, the similarity of low-level visual features di ff ers between two-tone and photo images, as photo images naturally contain richer low-level visual features. As a result, only the direct statistical comparison of category selectivity between PRE and POST phases is truly unbiased by low-level features, as they also mitigate biased o ff sets of category selectivity values of each phase. 

Low-level image features dominate the electrophysiological signal 

As shown in Figures  2C  & S2, electrophysiological responses were more similar, when the physical stimulus is the same (PRE vs. POST), compared to when the semantic concept is the same (POST vs. TPL). This di ff erence illustrates the large influence of low-level image features on the electrophysiological signal compared to the more subtle influence of the semantic concept, at least in the observed time window spanning 0.1  – 0.5  seconds. This finding is particularly important when interpreting the results reported in studies in which category-level decoding was performed on electrophysiological responses elicited by photographic stimuli (e.g., Cichy & Pantazis, 2017; Grootswagers et al., 2022; Kaneshiro et al., 2015; Kessler & Skeide, 2025) . Only few studies analytically tried to quantify or control for low-level features (Bracci & Op De Beeck, 2016; Cichy et al., 2017; Groen et al., 2017; Lützow Holm et al., 2024; Rice et al., 2014; Sieghartsleitner et al., 2025). Above-chance decoding performance reported in many other studies is therefore likely driven by low-level image features rather than semantic categories. However, a rapid serial visual presentation paradigm, as used in the current study, could lead to an artificial shift of this balance towards low-level feature 

18 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.05.730193 doi: bioRxiv preprint

processing, as downstream semantic processing steps might be suppressed by the dense visual input. If an emergent semantic signal existed for particular categories, it might require less degraded sensory input. Other techniques, such as fMRI or MEG, might be less dominated by the low-level visual signal. For instance, magnetoencephalographic responses to POST-disambiguation stimuli are much closer to those of their photo image counterparts than to their PRE-disambiguation counterparts (Flounders et al., 2019) , contrary to what we show using EEG (Figs.  2C  & S2). Furthermore, fMRI studies show semantic enrichment even within the early visual cortex, where low-level features should dominate the neural responses (Hsieh et al., 2010) .

Currently, there is no exhaustive account of which image properties can be considered as low-level, nor whether these properties can be fully parameterized independently of semantic category. Rather than forming discrete representational levels, low-level visual statistics and semantic information may instead lie on a continuum of increasingly abstract image regularities, complicating attempts to isolate purely semantic neural representations (Andrews et al., 2015; Cusack et al., 2011; Gerhard et al., 2013; Henderson et al., 2023; Rice et al., 2014). 

Neural alignment follows template exposure, not concept understanding 

Finally, we did not find spontaneous alignment between neural responses to recognized stimuli in the PRE-disambiguation phase with their photo image counterparts in the TPL-phase. This finding aligns with the absence of a category signal. An emergent category signal would rather facilitate spontaneous alignment, because the category is more easily perceived spontaneously than the stimulus-specific peculiarities such as edges and cluttering not related to the central object. One possible interpretation is that recognition of two-tone images does not necessarily entail reinstatement of a fully specified, stimulus-faithful representation, but instead reflects a partially specified perceptual state in which di ff erent levels of representational detail can be available to varying degrees. According to this view, recognition may rely on su ff icient information for object-level identification without requiring recovery of the full set of image-specific features that distinguish one stimulus from another. This interpretation 

19 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.05.730193 doi: bioRxiv preprint

is consistent with literature on image disambiguation, of which two-tone perception is a specific case, suggesting that perceptual outcomes vary depending on available priors and learned templates, with systematic di ff erences regarding the degree to which fine-grained visual detail is recovered (Davies et al., 2018; Gauthier & Tarr, 2016). More broadly, work on interactive feature processing in perceptual organization suggests that holistic or global interpretations can be formed even when local feature analysis remains incomplete or unstable (Peters et al., 2018). Together, these findings support the idea that semantic access and detailed perceptual reinstatement are at least partially dissociable, rather than necessarily co-occurring. 

However, only ~12% of all PRE and TPL trials across participants entered the present analyses, compared to ~85% of trials that entered the semantic enrichment analyses (Table  S1, Fig.  2B), limiting the statistical power compared to our main analysis. Furthermore, we did not systematically ask participants, from which timepoint onwards they recognized the image in the PRE phase. Stimuli recognized early could lead to stronger eff ects than stimuli recognized only in the third PRE-disambiguation block (Fig.  1). For the analysis of category selectivity, the within-category term in equation  2 is likewise bound by categories which were both (re-)learned by each participant, and thus does not capitalize from the large number of repetitions. 

Lastly, whether a particular two-tone image is perceived in a more holistic or more feature-dependent manner is prone to individual di ff erences between participants (Canas-Bajo & Whitney, 2020, 2022) 

and cannot be inferred from the acquired participant responses. Future experiments might include additional behavioral tests to further subdivide stimuli based on participant- and stimulus-specific cognitive strategies, allowing for a more targeted delineation of semantic enrichment, category selectivity or spontaneous aligning, their temporal trajectory and their neural origins. 

Conclusion 

In summary, our results suggest that EEG signals elicited by two-tone images carry information about learned semantic content, as demonstrated by an alignment between neural responses to 

20 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.05.730193 doi: bioRxiv preprint

disambiguated two-tone images and their corresponding photo templates. This semantic enrichment emerges rapidly after stimulus onset and persists over time, indicating that learned conceptual information can systematically modulate electrophysiological responses even in the presence of highly degraded visual input. At the same time, our findings provide neither evidence for a category-level representation of semantic information in the EEG signal nor for spontaneous alignment between neural responses and their corresponding templates prior to explicit disambiguation. Instead, the data suggest that neural similarity structure is dominated by low-level visual properties, with semantic e ff ects representing a more subtle and partially separable cognitive contribution within the same signal space. 

21 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.05.730193 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Methods 

Participants 

17 healthy adults (13 female) with a median age of 24 years (range: 20 – 34 years) were invited to participate in an EEG session. All participants had normal or corrected-to-normal vision and gave written informed consent. The study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Medical Faculty of the University of Leipzig, Germany (402/23-ek). Data acquisition took place at the Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences in Leipzig, Germany. 

Stimulus creation 

Two-tone images were generated from natural photographs. Most images (cows, croissants, penguins) were derived from the THINGS database (Hebart et al., 2019). Human bodies and hands are highly salient stimuli, but no su ff iciently ambiguous two-tone images could be generated from the images in the database. Accordingly, copyright-free images from the internet were used instead for hands and human bodies. See Table  S2 for more information on the original source of all used images. Input images were first converted to grayscale. Images were resized to a fixed resolution of 400 × 400 pixels. Grayscale images were then spatially smoothed using a Gaussian filter, with the standard deviation of the Gaussian kernel (σ) between 2pxs and 7pxs controlling the degree of smoothing. Smoothing kernels were manually selected on a per-image basis to achieve an optimal trade-o ff  between image distortion and the ability to associate the two-tone image with its original template image after disambiguation. Smoothed images were binarised using global intensity thresholding. For each image, a single threshold value was computed using Otsu’s method (Goh et al., 2018; Reining & Wallis, 2024), and pixel intensities were mapped to black or white accordingly. The resulting binary images were scaled to an 8-bit intensity range (0–255) and saved as grayscale JPEG files. 

22 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.05.730193 doi: bioRxiv preprint

We created ten di ff erent two-tone images (Fig. S1), comprising five semantic categories with two distinct images per category (cow, croissant, hands, human, penguin). Several additional candidate images and categories were evaluated in pilot experiments. The final set of stimuli was selected based on a low spontaneous recognition rate prior to template exposure and the subjective ease with which the two-tone images could be associated with their corresponding template images. 

Experimental design 

The experiment included three main phases: PRE-disambiguation (PRE), Template (TPL), and POST-disambiguation (POST). Each phase consisted of three blocks (Fig. 1), and each block comprised 2,400 stimuli, leading to a total of 7,200 stimulus presentations to maximize power within participants. 

During the PRE-disambiguation phase, two-tone images were presented at a rate of 2.5 Hz (250 ms stimulus duration, 150 ms inter-stimulus interval). Participants were instructed to attend to the screen and focus on the stimuli without performing an explicit task. Each block consisted of 80 repetitions of each stimulus presented in pseudorandom order, resulting in a total of 800 stimulus presentations per block and a block duration of 5 min 20 s. 

After completing the final PRE block, participants were briefly (250  ms, with option for repetition) shown each single two-tone image and were asked whether they had recognized the content depicted in the image in the previous blocks and, if so, what they believed it depicted. Based on the participants’ responses, the experimenter classified each stimulus as not recognized , falsely recognized 

(i.e., a reported concept that was clearly distinct from the true underlying image), or spontaneously recognized (i.e., correct identification of the image content, Table  1). 

Next, each stimulus was disambiguated using a fade-in/fade-out procedure. Specifically, the two-tone image was first presented, after which its opacity was gradually reduced to reveal the underlying grayscale photo template image, and subsequently increased again to restore the two-tone image. While the template image was fully visible, a computer-generated voice verbally provided the category 

23 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.05.730193 doi: bioRxiv preprint

label (cow, croissant, hands, human, penguin, in German) to facilitate recognition and to ensure that participants understood the intended image content. One automated disambiguation cycle lasted 5 seconds (1 s two-tone, 1 s fade-in, 1 s template, 1 s fade-out, 1 s two-tone), and was performed once for each stimulus within each disambiguation block. Disambiguation blocks were presented once prior to the template phase and again before each POST block. Following each automatic disambiguation block, participants were asked whether they experienced di ff iculties recognizing any of the stimuli. If so, an additional manual disambiguation cycle was conducted, during which participants could control the speed of the transition between two-tone and template images. 

Subsequently, the grayscale photo template images were presented in three TPL blocks. Stimulus timing and presentation parameters were identical to those used in the PRE phase. Participants were again instructed to attend to the stimuli without performing an explicit task. 

The subsequent POST phase comprised three blocks. These blocks were identical to the PRE blocks, except that each POST block was preceded by a disambiguation block to refresh participants’ memory of the ten two-tone images and their underlying template. 

After completion of the final POST block, participants were again briefly presented with each two-tone image and asked to report its identity. Based on these responses, the experimenter classified each stimulus as learned (not recognized during PRE, but correctly identified after disambiguation), 

re-learned (falsely recognized during PRE, but correctly identified after disambiguation), or not (re-)learned (not or falsely recognized during PRE and still not correctly recognized after disambiguation, Table  1). 

The entire experiment lasted approximately 90 minutes including breaks, and required an additional ~30 minutes for EEG cap preparation. Participants were allowed to take breaks ad libitum between blocks. Stimuli were presented at 5.3° of visual angle on a uniform grey background. This relatively small stimulus size was chosen based on pilot experiments indicating that this setup facilitated holistic perception of the images. Images in each experimental block were displayed in random order. 

24 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.05.730193 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Data acquisition 

Participants were seated in front of a computer screen in a dimly lit room. EEG was recorded using active electrodes (Brain Products) arranged in a custom montage comprising 34 electrodes: 31 scalp EEG electrodes (Fz, F3, F7, F9, FC5, POz, C3, T7, TP9, CP5, P7, P3, Pz, O1, O2, P8, P4, CP6, TP10, T8, C4, Oz, FC6, F10, F8, F4, Fp2, FC4, CP4, FC3, CP3), one electrooculogram (EOG) electrode situated on the right cheek, an online-reference electrode at FCz, and a ground electrode at Fp1. No online filter was applied. 

EEG signals were recorded using BrainVision Recorder (version 1.22.0001, Brain Products) at a sampling rate of 1000 Hz. EEG caps (Easycap) were fitted to the participants’ heads, and a custom-made conductive gel (hydroxyethyl cellulose, propylene glycol, sodium chloride, and water) was applied until electrode impedances were reduced to approximately below 20 kΩ. Electrodes exhibiting poor signal quality (e.g., flat signal, persistently high impedance, or excessive noise) were documented during recording and excluded from further analysis prior to preprocessing. 

Data preprocessing 

Data preprocessing was performed using Bash, Python (v. 3.11.6), and R (v.  4.3) on a high-performance computing cluster at the Max Planck Computing and Data Facility (Garching, Germany). Electrophysiological data were preprocessed using MNE (v. 1.5.1; (Gramfort et al., 2013)). 

First, channels exhibiting excessive noise were manually identified and removed. The raw data were then resampled to 250 Hz. In participants for whom the necessary electrodes were available, two artificial EOG channels were constructed: (1) by subtracting the voltage of the physical EOG electrode located below the right eye from electrode Fp2 (above the right eye), and (2) by subtracting the signals of electrodes F9 and F10 (Kessler et al., 2025; Kessler & Skeide, 2025) . The physical EOG channel was subsequently removed from the dataset. 

25 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.05.730193 doi: bioRxiv preprint

The continuous time series was high-pass filtered at 0.1 Hz and low-pass filtered at 30 Hz using a linear finite impulse response, zero-phase non-causal band-pass filters with a windowed time domain design method (firwin), and a Hamming window with 0.0194 passband ripple and 53 dB stopband attenuation, with transition bandwidths of 0.1 and 7.5 Hz and -6 dB cuto ff  frequencies of 0.05 and 33.75 Hz and a filter kernel duration of 33 seconds. To further identify and correct noisy channels and to compute a reference, the pyprep pipeline (Bigdely-Shamlo et al., 2015) including the RANSAC algorithm (Fischler & Bolles, 1981) was applied. Identified bad channels were interpolated, and all channels were re-referenced to the resulting robust average reference. Independent component analysis (ICA) was performed using the Picard algorithm (Ablin et al., 2018) on a copy of the data that had been high-pass filtered at 1 Hz. Twenty independent components were estimated with a maximum of 500 iterations. Each component was correlated with the available artificial EOG channels. Components were classified as ocular artifacts if the correlation exceeded a threshold determined via adaptive z-scoring. The resulting ICA solution was then applied to the broadband-filtered data to remove the identified artifactual components. 

Data were subsequently epoched using a pre-stimulus baseline of 400 ms (corresponding to one stimulus cycle) and a post-stimulus onset interval extending to 800 ms after stimulus onset (corresponding to two stimulus cycles). Linear detrending was applied across the entire epoch, followed by mean-centering using the pre-stimulus baseline interval. Additional artifact correction was performed at the epoch level using the autoreject package (Jas et al., 2016, 2017). Hyperparameters were configured to reject, but not interpolate, contaminated epochs, as channel interpolation had already been performed at an earlier preprocessing stage. Rejection thresholds were estimated using 5-fold cross-validation. 

Similarity estimation and aggregation 

We estimated Mahalanobis distances as dissimilarity measures between epochs belonging to the di ff erent conditions using all electrodes and a post-stimulus onset time window from 0.1 to 0.5  s. The 

26 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.05.730193 doi: bioRxiv preprint

window was chosen to cover one stimulus cycle, starting shortly after stimulus onset when a neural response can be expected, and ending briefly after the next stimulus onset. The resulting channel × time point data matrices were transformed into a single feature vector (Lu et al., 2015; Pacheco-Estefan et al., 2024) , and pairwise neural dissimilarity between conditions was quantified. All possible pairwise distances were computed, and the respective distance values were extracted for evaluating our hypotheses (see below). We used a shrinkage estimator to compute the (inverse) covariance matrix 

(Ledoit & Wolf, 2004) . Mahalanobis distance estimation was conducted separately for each participant to account for the di ff erent noise levels of each electrode and each participant. To account for di ff erent noise levels between participants, all inference is done on either di ff erence values – calculated within-participant – or using paired statistical tests. 

Hypothesis 1: Semantic enrichment (SE). To test whether neural responses to two-tone images became more similar (less dissimilar) to responses to their corresponding template images after disambiguation, we computed, for each participant ( p), the average di ff erence in dissimilarity between PRE vs. TPL and POST vs. TPL conditions (paired for each stimulus) across all learned and relearned stimuli ( L). Semantic enrichment was quantified as: 

𝑆𝐸 𝑝 = 1|𝐿| 𝑖∊𝐿 |𝐿| 

∑ {𝑑𝑖𝑠(𝑃𝑅𝐸 𝑖 , 𝑇𝑃𝐿 𝑖 ) − 𝑐 𝑝,1 } − {𝑑𝑖𝑠(𝑃𝑂𝑆𝑇 𝑖 , 𝑇𝑃𝐿 𝑖 ) − 𝑐 𝑝,2 }[ ] (1a) 

To exclude stimulus-unspecific e ff ects, we subtracted a participant- and phase-comparison-dependent 

constant  . Whereas the e ff ect of interest was calculated by pairing the same stimuli, it cannot be 𝑐 𝑝,𝑘 

avoided catching also unspecific e ff ects that can be attributed to the experimental phase. For example, if neural responses to all PRE stimuli share (or lack) a common signal, the dissimilarity metric between any unpaired PRE and TPL stimulus (e.g., cow_02_PRE vs. penguin_06_TPL) will be higher, than the dissimilarity metric between any unpaired POST and TPL stimulus (e.g., cow_03_POST vs. croissant_02_TPL). The semantic enrichment result will therefore be biased by unspecific e ff ects that just di ff erentiate experimental phases. As a solution, we systematically calculated all possible 

27 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.05.730193 doi: bioRxiv preprint

distances (i.e., the Cartesian product) of all possible (paired and unpaired) comparisons, and averaged across those: 

𝑐 𝑝,1 = 1|𝐴|² 𝑎∊𝐴 |𝐴| 

∑ 𝑏∊𝐴 |𝐴| 

∑ 𝑑𝑖𝑠(𝑃𝑅𝐸 𝑎 , 𝑇𝑃𝐿 𝑏 ) (1b) 

is then calculated analogously for the dissimilarity between POST and TPL. A resembles the set of 𝑐 𝑝,2 

all 10 stimuli. We evaluated the e ff ects of eliminating these constants from the analyses and its bias of the semantic enrichment metric in the Supplementary Results & Figure  S4. 

To further evaluate temporal properties of semantic enrichment, we repeated the same analysis for small consecutive time windows (10  milliseconds, corresponding to 4 samples of the preprocessed epochs), using the data of all electrodes. We also explored the spatial topography of semantic enrichment by applying the same formula to data from the previous time window of interest (0.1  s – 0.5  s) but for each electrode separately. 

Hypothesis 2: Category selectivity (CS). To assess whether image category information, beyond individual stimulus identity, was encoded in neural responses after learning, we computed neural dissimilarities between two-tone and template images within the same category ( within-category pairs , W) and between di ff erent categories ( between-category pairs , B), separately for PRE, POST, and TPL phases. Only image pairs for which both stimuli were classified as learned or re-learned were included. 

Category selectivity was defined as the di ff erence between between-category and within-category distances, computed for each participant ( p) as: 

𝐶𝑆 𝑝,𝑃𝑅𝐸 = 1|𝐵| 𝑖<𝑗 |𝐵| 

∑ 𝑑𝑖𝑠(𝑃𝑅𝐸 𝑖 , 𝑃𝑅𝐸 𝑗 ) − 1|𝑊| 𝑖<𝑗 |𝑊| 

∑ 𝑑𝑖𝑠(𝑃𝑅𝐸 𝑖 , 𝑃𝑅𝐸 𝑗 ) (2) 

Category selectivity is calculated similarly for the other phases (POST and TPL), and the di ff erence in category selectivity between phases is computed using paired tests. 

28 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.05.730193 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Hypothesis 3: Spontaneous alignment (SA). To examine whether spontaneously recognized two-tone images elicited neural responses more similarly to their corresponding template images prior to disambiguation, we compared PRE vs. TPL dissimilarities between spontaneously recognized stimuli ( S) and stimuli that were not recognized ( N). For each participant ( p), spontaneous alignment was defined as: 

𝑆𝐴 𝑝 = 1|𝑁| 𝑖∊𝑁 |𝑁| 

∑ 𝑑𝑖𝑠(𝑃𝑅𝐸 𝑖 , 𝑇𝑃𝐿 𝑖 ) − 1|𝑆| 𝑗∊𝑆 |𝑆| 

∑ 𝑑𝑖𝑠(𝑃𝑅𝐸 𝑗 , 𝑇𝑃𝐿 𝑗 ) (3) 

Multidimensional scaling on distance values. To visually illustrate how the stimulus-wise distance values between the three experimental phases are related, we computed a non-parametric multidimensional scaling model with only one dimension. Therefore, we used the mean of all learned and re-learned stimuli’s raw Mahalanobis distance values for each combination of experimental phases (PRE vs. POST, PRE vs. TPL, POST vs. TPL) and entered them to a Kruskal’s non-metric multidimensional scaling function (R, MASS::isoMDS v.  7.3-60.0.1). 

Statistical analyses 

To test whether semantic enrichment (SE), category selectivity (CS), or spontaneous alignment (SA) were greater than zero, we computed one-tailed Bayes Factors (BFs) using the R BayesFactor package (v. 0.9.12-4.7). Cauchy priors with a scale parameter of 0.707 were used which provide rather conservative prior distributions on the e ff ect sizes. Reported BFs >  1 quantify the evidence in favor of the hypothesis that the respective e ff ect is greater than zero. BFs <  1 quantify the evidence for an e ff ect smaller or equal to zero. The classification of Kass & Raftery (Kass & Raftery, 1995) was used to verbally qualify evidence based on BFs, with a BF  > 3 considered evidence, and a BF  > 20 considered strong evidence (analogous for the inverses). For timepoint-wise and electrode-wise analyses, the same 

criteria were applied (Teichmann, 2022) . We either tested if  , , or if 𝑆𝐸 > 0  𝐶𝑆 𝑃𝑂𝑆𝑇 − 𝐶𝑆 𝑃𝑅𝐸 > 0 

. In complementary frequentist analyses, we computed one-tailed Wilcoxon signed-rank tests, 𝑆𝐴 > 0 

29 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.05.730193 doi: bioRxiv preprint

using an arbitrary critical alpha level of 0.05. For multiple paired variables we applied Friedman tests. Eff ect sizes and corresponding confidence intervals were calculated using Hedges’ g, to account for a relatively small sample size. 

References 

Ablin, P., Cardoso, J.-F., & Gramfort, A. (2018). Faster Independent Component Analysis by Preconditioning With Hessian Approximations. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing , 66 (15), 4040–4049. https://doi.org/10.1109/TSP.2018.2844203 

Andrews, T. J., Watson, D. M., Rice, G. E., & Hartley, T. (2015). Low-level properties of natural images predict topographic patterns of neural response in the ventral visual pathway. Journal of Vision , 15 (7), 3. https://doi.org/10.1167/15.7.3 

Benjamini, Y., & Hochberg, Y. (1995). Controlling the false discovery rate: A practical and powerful approach to multiple testing. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Methodological) , 57 (1), 289–300. 

Bigdely-Shamlo, N., Mullen, T., Kothe, C., Su, K.-M., & Robbins, K. A. (2015). The PREP pipeline: Standardized preprocessing for large-scale EEG analysis. Frontiers in Neuroinformatics , 9.https://doi.org/10.3389/fninf.2015.00016 

Bracci, S., & Op De Beeck, H. (2016). Dissociations and Associations between Shape and Category Representations in the Two Visual Pathways. The Journal of Neuroscience , 36 (2), 432–444. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2314-15.2016 

Canas-Bajo, T., & Whitney, D. (2020). Stimulus-Specific Individual Differences in Holistic Perception of Mooney Faces. Frontiers in Psychology , 11 , 585921. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.585921 

Canas-Bajo, T., & Whitney, D. (2022). Individual differences in classification images of Mooney faces. Journal of Vision , 22 (13), 3. https://doi.org/10.1167/jov.22.13.3 

Carlson, T. A., Hogendoorn, H., Kanai, R., Mesik, J., & Turret, J. (2011). High temporal resolution decoding of object position and category. Journal of Vision , 11 (10), 9. https://doi.org/10.1167/11.10.9 

Castelhano, J., Rebola, J., Leitão, B., Rodriguez, E., & Castelo-Branco, M. (2013). To Perceive or Not Perceive: The Role of Gamma-band Activity in Signaling Object Percepts. PLOS ONE , 8(6), e66363. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0066363 

Chen, Y., Shimotake, A., Matsumoto, R., Kunieda, T., Kikuchi, T., Miyamoto, S., Fukuyama, H., Takahashi, R., Ikeda, 

30 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.05.730193 doi: bioRxiv preprint

A., & Lambon Ralph, M. A. (2016). The ‘when’ and ‘where’ of semantic coding in the anterior temporal lobe: Temporal representational similarity analysis of electrocorticogram data. Cortex , 79 , 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2016.02.015 

Cichy, R. M., Khosla, A., Pantazis, D., & Oliva, A. (2017). Dynamics of scene representations in the human brain revealed by magnetoencephalography and deep neural networks. NeuroImage , 153 , 346–358. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2016.03.063 

Cichy, R. M., & Pantazis, D. (2017). Multivariate pattern analysis of MEG and EEG: A comparison of representational structure in time and space. NeuroImage , 158 , 441–454. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2017.07.023 

Cusack, R., Veldsman, M., Naci, L., Mitchell, D. J., & Linke, A. C. (2011). Seeing different objects in different ways: Measuring ventral visual tuning to sensory and semantic features with dynamically adaptive imaging. Human Brain Mapping , 33 (2), 387–397. https://doi.org/10.1002/hbm.21219 

Davies, D. J., Teufel, C., & Fletcher, P. C. (2018). Anomalous Perceptions and Beliefs Are Associated With Shifts Toward Different Types of Prior Knowledge in Perceptual Inference. Schizophrenia Bulletin , 44 (6), 1245–1253. https://doi.org/10.1093/schbul/sbx177 

Doi, H., Koga, T., & Shinohara, K. (2009). 18-Month-olds can perceive Mooney faces. Neuroscience Research , 64 (3), 317–322. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neures.2009.04.002 

Dolan, R. J., Fink, G. R., Rolls, E., Booth, M., Holmes, A., Frackowiak, R. S. J., & Friston, K. J. (1997). How the brain learns to see objects and faces in an impoverished context. Nature , 389 (6651), 596–599. https://doi.org/10.1038/39309 

Enge, A., Süß, F., & Abdel Rahman, R. (2023). Instant Effects of Semantic Information on Visual Perception. The Journal of Neuroscience , 43 (26), 4896–4906. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2038-22.2023 

Ferrante, M., Boccato, T., Bargione, S., & Toschi, N. (2024). Decoding visual brain representations from electroencephalography through knowledge distillation and latent diffusion models. Computers in Biology and Medicine , 178 , 108701. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiomed.2024.108701 

Fischler, M. A., & Bolles, R. C. (1981). Random sample consensus: A paradigm for model fitting with applications to image analysis and automated cartography. Communications of the ACM , 24 (6), 381–395. 

Flounders, M. W., González-García, C., Hardstone, R., & He, B. J. (2019). Neural dynamics of visual ambiguity resolution by perceptual prior. eLife , 8, e41861. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.41861 

Gauthier, I., & Tarr, M. J. (2016). Visual Object Recognition: Do We (Finally) Know More Now Than We Did? Annual Review of Vision Science , 2, 377–396. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-vision-111815-114621 

Gerhard, H. E., Wichmann, F. A., & Bethge, M. (2013). How Sensitive Is the Human Visual System to the Local 

31 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.05.730193 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Statistics of Natural Images? PLOS Computational Biology , 9(1), e1002873. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002873 

Goh, T. Y., Basah, S. N., Yazid, H., Aziz Safar, M. J., & Ahmad Saad, F. S. (2018). Performance analysis of image thresholding: Otsu technique. Measurement , 114 , 298–307. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.measurement.2017.09.052 

González-García, C., Flounders, M. W., Chang, R., Baria, A. T., & He, B. J. (2018). Content-specific activity in frontoparietal and default-mode networks during prior-guided visual perception. eLife , 7, e36068. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.36068 

Gramfort, A., Luessi, M., Larson, E., Engemann, D. A., Strohmeier, D., Brodbeck, C., Goj, R., Jas, M., Brooks, T., Parkkonen, L., & Hämäläinen, M. (2013). MEG and EEG data analysis with MNE-Python. Frontiers in Neuroscience , 7, 267. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2013.00267 

Groen, I. I. A., Silson, E. H., & Baker, C. I. (2017). Contributions of low- and high-level properties to neural processing of visual scenes in the human brain. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences ,

372 (1714), 20160102. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2016.0102 

Grootswagers, T., Robinson, A. K., & Carlson, T. A. (2019). The representational dynamics of visual objects in rapid serial visual processing streams. NeuroImage , 188 , 668–679. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2018.12.046 

Grootswagers, T., Zhou, I., Robinson, A. K., Hebart, M. N., & Carlson, T. A. (2022). Human EEG recordings for 1,854 concepts presented in rapid serial visual presentation streams. Scientific Data , 9(1), 3. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41597-021-01102-7 

Hebart, M. N., Dickter, A. H., Kidder, A., Kwok, W. Y., Corriveau, A., Van Wicklin, C., & Baker, C. I. (2019). THINGS: A database of 1,854 object concepts and more than 26,000 naturalistic object images. PLOS ONE , 14 (10), e0223792. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0223792 

Henderson, M. M., Tarr, M. J., & Wehbe, L. (2023). Low-level tuning biases in higher visual cortex reflect the semantic informativeness of visual features. Journal of Vision , 23 (4), 8. https://doi.org/10.1167/jov.23.4.8 

Hsieh, P.-J., Vul, E., & Kanwisher, N. (2010). Recognition Alters the Spatial Pattern of fMRI Activation in Early Retinotopic Cortex. Journal of Neurophysiology , 103 (3), 1501–1507. https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.00812.2009 

Huth, A. G., Nishimoto, S., Vu, A. T., & Gallant, J. L. (2012). A Continuous Semantic Space Describes the Representation of Thousands of Object and Action Categories across the Human Brain. Neuron , 76 (6), 1210–1224. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2012.10.014 

Ishikawa, T., & Mogi, K. (2011). Visual one-shot learning as an ‘anti-camouflage device’: A novel morphing paradigm. 

32 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.05.730193 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Cognitive Neurodynamics , 5(3), 231–239. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11571-011-9171-z 

Jas, M., Engemann, D. A., Bekhti, Y., Raimondo, F., & Gramfort, A. (2017). Autoreject: Automated artifact rejection for MEG and EEG data. NeuroImage , 159 , 417–429. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2017.06.030 

Jas, M., Engemann, D., Raimondo, F., Bekhti, Y., & Gramfort, A. (2016, June). Automated rejection and repair of bad trials in MEG/EEG. 6th International Workshop on Pattern Recognition in Neuroimaging (PRNI) .https://hal.science/hal-01313458 

Kaneshiro, B., Guimaraes, M. P., Kim, H.-S., Norcia, A. M., & Suppes, P. (2015). A Representational Similarity Analysis of the Dynamics of Object Processing Using Single-Trial EEG Classification. PLOS ONE , 10 (8), e0135697. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0135697 

Kass, R. E., & Raftery, A. E. (1995). Bayes factors. Journal of the American Statistical Association , 90 (430), 773–795. 

Kay, K. N., Naselaris, T., Prenger, R. J., & Gallant, J. L. (2008). Identifying natural images from human brain activity. 

Nature , 452 (7185), 352–355. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature06713 

Kessler, R., Enge, A., & Skeide, M. A. (2025). How EEG preprocessing shapes decoding performance. 

Communications Biology , 8(1), 1039. https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-025-08464-3 

Kessler, R., & Skeide, M. A. (2025). Electrophysiological decoding captures the temporal trajectory of face categorization in infants. Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience , 75 .https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dcn.2025.101601 

Ledoit, O., & Wolf, M. (2004). A well-conditioned estimator for large-dimensional covariance matrices. Journal of Multivariate Analysis , 88 (2), 365–411. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0047-259X(03)00096-4 

Lu, Y., Wang, C., Chen, C., & Xue, G. (2015). Spatiotemporal Neural Pattern Similarity Supports Episodic Memory. 

Current Biology , 25 (6), 780–785. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2015.01.055 

Lützow Holm, E., Fernández Slezak, D., & Tagliazucchi, E. (2024). Contribution of low-level image statistics to EEG decoding of semantic content in multivariate and univariate models with feature optimization. NeuroImage ,

293 , 120626. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2024.120626 

Mooney, C. M. (1957). Age in the development of closure ability in children. Canadian Journal of Psychology / Revue Canadienne de Psychologie , 11 (4), 219–226. https://doi.org/10.1037/h0083717 

Naselaris, T., Kay, K. N., Nishimoto, S., & Gallant, J. L. (2011). Encoding and decoding in fMRI. NeuroImage, Multivariate Decoding and Brain Reading , 56 (2), 400–410. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.07.073 

O’Doherty, C. (2026). Infants have rich visual categories in ventrotemporal cortex at 2 months of age. Nature Neuroscience .

Otsuka, Y., Hill, H. C. H., Kanazawa, S., Yamaguchi, M. K., & Spehar, B. (2012). Perception of Mooney faces by 

33 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.05.730193 doi: bioRxiv preprint

young infants: The role of local feature visibility, contrast polarity, and motion. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology , 111 (2), 164–179. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jecp.2010.10.014 

Pacheco-Estefan, D., Fellner, M.-C., Kunz, L., Zhang, H., Reinacher, P., Roy, C., Brandt, A., Schulze-Bonhage, A., Yang, L., Wang, S., Liu, J., Xue, G., & Axmacher, N. (2024). Maintenance and transformation of representational formats during working memory prioritization. Nature Communications , 15 (1), 8234. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-52541-w 

Peters, J. C., Goebel, R., & Goffaux, V. (2018). From coarse to fine: Interactive feature processing precedes local feature analysis in human face perception. Biological Psychology , 138 , 1–10. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsycho.2018.07.009 

Petrov, Y., Qian, J., & Nador, J. (2012). ERP and EEG correlates of bottom-up and top-down image recognition in early visual areas. Journal of Vision , 12 (9), 512–512. https://doi.org/10.1167/12.9.512 

Reining, L. C., & Wallis, T. S. A. (2024). A psychophysical evaluation of techniques for Mooney image generation. 

PeerJ , 12 , e18059. https://doi.org/10.7717/peerj.18059 

Rice, G. E., Watson, D. M., Hartley, T., & Andrews, T. J. (2014). Low-Level Image Properties of Visual Objects Predict Patterns of Neural Response across Category-Selective Regions of the Ventral Visual Pathway. Journal of Neuroscience , 34 (26), 8837–8844. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5265-13.2014 

Samaha, J., Boutonnet, B., Postle, B. R., & Lupyan, G. (2018). Effects of meaningfulness on perception: Alpha-band oscillations carry perceptual expectations and influence early visual responses. Scientific Reports , 8(1), 6606. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-25093-5 

Sieghartsleitner, S., Schreiner, L., Grünwald, J., Jordan, M., Spataro, R., Scharinger, J., & Guger, C. (2025). Decoding of image properties from single-trial visual evoked potentials recorded by ultra-high-density EEG. Scientific Reports , 15 (1), 32917. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-18275-5 

Simanova, I., Gerven, M. van, Oostenveld, R., & Hagoort, P. (2010). Identifying Object Categories from Event-Related EEG: Toward Decoding of Conceptual Representations. PLOS ONE , 5(12), e14465. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0014465 

Snowden, J. S., Harris, J. M., Thompson, J. C., Kobylecki, C., Jones, M., Richardson, A. M., & Neary, D. (2018). Semantic dementia and the left and right temporal lobes. Cortex , 107 , 188–203. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2017.08.024 

Teichmann, L. (2022). An Empirically Driven Guide on Using Bayes Factors for M/EEG Decoding. Aperture Neuro , 2,1–10. https://doi.org/10.52294/ApertureNeuro.2022.2.MAOC6465 

Teufel, C., Dakin, S. C., & Fletcher, P. C. (2018). Prior object-knowledge sharpens properties of early visual 

34 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.05.730193 doi: bioRxiv preprint

feature-detectors. Scientific Reports , 8(1), 10853. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-28845-5 

Thome, I., Hohmann, D. M., Zimmermann, K. M., Smith, M. L., Kessler, R., & Jansen, A. (2021). “I Spy with my Little Eye, Something that is a Face…”: A Brain Network for Illusory Face Detection. Cerebral Cortex , bhab199. https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhab199 

Zhang, C., Qiao, K., Wang, L., Tong, L., Zeng, Y., & Yan, B. (2018). Constraint-Free Natural Image Reconstruction From fMRI Signals Based on Convolutional Neural Network. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience , 12 , 242. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2018.00242 

Data availability 

The raw data collected for this study is available through a public link on Zenodo (https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.20037230). 

Code availability 

All code used for data analysis is available from GitHub (https://github.com/SkeideLab/MOONEY_adults). The experimental paradigm is available for download from Pavlovia (https://gitlab.pavlovia.org/kesslerr/MOONEY_adults), and code to generate Mooney images is available from GitHub (https://github.com/Algebreaker/MooneyGeneration). 

Acknowledgements 

This work was supported by the German Research Foundation (DFG Heisenberg Program Grant 433758790 awarded to M.A.S.) and the Jacobs Foundation (Research Fellowship awarded to M.A.S.). The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish or preparation of the manuscript. 

35 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.05.730193 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Author contributions 

Conceptualization: RK, JF, MAS; Formal analysis: RK; Funding acquisition: MAS; Investigation: RK, JF; Methodology: RK, JF, MAS; Project administration: RK, JF, MAS; Ressources: RK, MAS; Software: RK; Visualization: RK; Writing: original manuscript: RK, JF; Writing: review & editing: RK, JF, MAS 

Ethics declarations 

The authors declare no competing interests. 

36 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.05.730193 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Supplementary Figures 

Fig. S1 | Stimuli. Ten images of five categories (cow, croissant, hands, human, penguin) were converted to greyscale (right columns), smoothed, and binarized to create two-tone images (left columns). See Table  S2 for image sources. Images with unclear copyright information have been censored. 

37 

.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.05.730193 doi: bioRxiv preprint Fig. S2 | Comparison of Mahalanobis distances between experimental phases. The stimulus- and participant-wise Mahalanobis distances are plotted for di ff erent comparisons of experimental phases. Subjects are indicated by di ff erent shapes. The dashed diagonal is the identity line. A: PRE vs. POST against PRE vs. TPL distances. The comparisons di ff er only in the low-level features. B: PRE vs. POST against POST vs. TPL distances. The comparisons di ff er in low-level features and semantic concept. C: POST vs. TPL against PRE vs. TPL distances. The comparisons di ff er only in the semantic concept. The distribution shows smaller distances in POST vs. TPL, indicating semantic enrichment. The graph o ff ers a di ff erent view to the same data from Figure  2. All stimuli are shown, irrespective of their group, i.e., (re-)learned, spontaneous, and not (re-)learned. The electrophysiological response is more similar (less dissimilar) between PRE and POST conditions than either of 

38 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.05.730193 doi: bioRxiv preprint

them with the TPL condition in most participants and stimuli, indicating that low-level image features are a stronger driver for dissimilarity than semantic concept. The filtered data points for learned and re-learned stimuli per participant formed the basis for the multidimensional scaling approach of Figure  2C. 

39 

.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.05.730193 doi: bioRxiv preprint Fig. S3 | Time-resolved semantic enrichment. The graph illustrates the group-level time-resolved semantic enrichment from Figure  2D from di ff erent angles. A: The Bayes Factor indicating evidence for or against a positive semantic enrichment per time window is illustrated, analogous to Figure 2D. B: The undirected e ff ect sizes were computed across participants using Hedges’ g. C: The individual semantic enrichment values per participant are illustrated in grey lines, and the mean across participants in black. 

40 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.05.730193 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Supplementary Methods 

To compute semantic enrichment values, we introduced participant-specific constants  (eq.  1b) in 𝑐 𝑝,𝑘 

order to subtract those from the distance values of each experimental phase with the template phase within equation  1a (cf. Methods). Without those constants, the (di ff erence of) distance measures of the neurophysiological responses would be biased by stimulus-unspecific e ff ects. Figure  S4 illustrates the Bayes Factors of the time-resolved semantic enrichment values when omitting those constants. 

Each epoch includes 3 stimulus-cycles. Stimuli are presented at -400  ms, 0  ms, and 400  ms. For any analysis, epochs are ordered based on the label of the stimulus presented at 0  ms, whereas the choice of the other two stimuli, one preceding and one succeeding, are random. More specifically, when the trials are sorted for the analyses and the stimulus at 0  ms always showed cow_02 (PRE, POST, or TPL), the stimuli at -400  ms and 400  ms comprise random other stimuli, as the presentation was 

randomized. When not including  in equation  1a, those semantic enrichment values become clearly 𝑐 𝑝,𝑘 

positive, even with unordered stimuli (first and third peak), indicating similarity di ff erences that are specific to the experimental phase rather than to this exact stimulus and the experimental phase. More specifically: Figure  S4 shows 3 peaks: Peak #1 (from left to right) is only sensitive to the experimental phase, because stimuli are unordered. Peak #2 is sensitive to the experimental phase and the stimulus, as stimuli in this time window are ordered. Peak #3 can theoretically be both, either e ff ects of the experimental phase, or also an e ff ect of the preceding stimulus which is again ordered. When introducing the constant to the equation, the unspecific peak #1 completely vanished from the baseline period (compare Figures  2D and S4). Peak  #2 lost its stimulus-unspecific parts, reduced in amplitude and elongated. Peak  #3 as a separate entity also vanished. 

The reason for the stimulus-unspecific peaks can be manifold. On the one hand, if the PRE trials were more often accompanied by face pareidolia, face specific components could be encoded in the neuronal signal (Thome et al., 2021) . Therefore, the PRE trials express some “extra” component, and the first term in equation  1 gets larger if neglecting the constant, leading to spurious positive values for semantic enrichment. On the other hand, if the POST and TPL trials were accompanied by a 

41 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.05.730193 doi: bioRxiv preprint

“recognition” signal – as in both phases stimuli were recognized – it renders again the first term in equation  1 large, leading to spurious semantic enrichment. 

Fig. S4 | Biased, stimulus-unspecific semantic enrichment. The Bayes Factor of the (biased) semantic enrichment values are plotted for small time windows of 10  ms, analogous to Figure  2D. The graph illustrates how the semantic enrichment calculation can be biased by e ff ects of the experimental phase, if not corrected. Whereas in the main analysis, the semantic enrichment calculation was corrected using constants to eliminate stimulus unspecific e ff ects (eqs.  1a  & 1b), the current image illustrates consequences of omitting the constant. 

42 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.05.730193 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Supplementary Tables 

Table S1 | Counts of image categorizations. The answers within the ratings block after PRE and POST phases (Fig.  1) were used to categorize each stimulus for each participant. The counts for each image being categorized in the di ff erent groups are illustrated. 

Image  Learned  Re-learned  Spontaneous  Not learned  Not re-learned 

cow_02  8 8 0 1 0

cow_03  7 6 4 0 0

croissant_01  5 11  0 0 1

croissant_03  11  4 2 0 0

hands_02  8 9 0 0 0

hands_03  5 6 6 0 0

human_01  2 9 6 0 0

human_02  5 10  1 1 0

penguin_06  9 6 2 0 0

penguin_07  13  2 0 0 2

43 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.05.730193 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Table S2 | Sources of the stimulus images. Images were taken either from the THINGS database, or otherwise searched for on the internet. The table lists the original sources of the images, license type and author. For two images, the original source is unclear, although they appear to serve widely as stock photos. They are therefore censored in the manuscript, but can be identified over the THINGS database (https://osf.io/jum2f). 

Image  Dataset  THINGS id  Original source  License  Author 

cow_02  THINGS  calf1_10s  https://pixabay.com/photos/cow-calf-y 

oung-animal-beef-790263/ 

Pixabay license 1

Petra “Pezibear” 

cow_03  THINGS  calf1_14s  unclear  unclear  -

croissant_01  THINGS  croissant_05s  https://www.freeimageslive.co.uk/free 

_stock_image/croissant-jpg 

CC BY 3.0  freefoodph otos.com 

croissant_03  THINGS  croissant_08s  unclear  unclear  -

hands_02  internet  - https://www.pexels.com/photo/faceles 

s-artisan-planing-hardwood-plank-597 

4252/ 

Pexels license 2

Ono Kosuki 

hands_03  internet  - https://www.pexels.com/de-de/foto/h 

olz-industrie-gesichtslos-verwischen-5 

974289/ 

Pexels license 

Ono Kosuki 

human_01  internet  - https://www.pexels.com/de-de/foto/m 

adchen-spielt-mit-blasen-1919030/ 

Pexels license 

Alexander Dummer 

human_02  internet  - https://www.pexels.com/photo/person 

-swimming-on-body-of-water-863988/ 

Pexels license 

Guduru Ajay Bhargav 

penguin_06  THINGS  penguin_15s  https://pixabay.com/nl/photos/koning 

spinguïn-wandeling-1154432/ 

Pixabay license 

Marcel Langthim 

penguin_07  THINGS  penguin_20s  https://pixabay.com/photos/penguin-z 

oo-bird-animal-1598209/ 

Pixabay license 

Joanna Jankowski  

> 2

https://www.pexels.com/license/  

> 1

https://pixabay.com/service/license-summary/ 

44